[PDF page 19]
1 Religion as the Site of the
Colonial Encounter
Sitt Naaify came down and entered the serail about an hour after
sunset. It was dark. She called for a lamp. It was brought her.
Ordering it to be held up before her, she for a long time feasted
her eyes on the ghastly sight. Several hundred mangled corpses lay
heaped up over each other before her. “Well done my good and
faithful Druzes,” she exclaimed; “this is just what I expected from
you.” The women and some of the Shehab emirs who had hidden
in their own harem, now thronged around her. The latter kissed
her feet and implored her for pardon and forgiveness. She told
them all to follow her. The Turks were all this time seen flitting
about like spectres through the court, under the cover of darkness,
turning over the dead bodies, if perchance they might grope up
some plunder; and wherever life yet lingered, giving the coup de
grâce.
Charles H. Churchill, The Druzes and the Maronites
under the Turkish Rule from 1840 to 1860 (1862)
I
n the hills of Mount Lebanon, a few miles from the scene of this mas-
sacre, a Christian man, Salim Shawish, wondered if a similar fate awaited
him and his family. For in his own home sat a Druze notable who, sword
and musket within easy reach, announced that he had come to “save some
persons and kill others.” It was nearing the end of the Islamic calendar year
1276, the early summer of 1860 by Christian reckoning. The setting was
the prosperous but ill-fated town of Dayr al-Qamar—the “city of the
mountain” in local parlance—which lay at the heart of a murderous strug-
gle between the Druzes and Maronites of Mount Lebanon. The war pitted
neighbor against neighbor, forcing a sense of communal segregation on a
society that had hitherto thrived on everyday contact and mixture. With
this multicommunal heritage in mind and with the knowledge of how
things were ordinarily meant to be, Salim begged the Druze lord, whose
family, the Abu Nakads, had once made (and were now reasserting) undis-
puted claim to the town under siege, to protect him; he brought the notable
coffee, prepared him a meal, and smoked with him, and then offered him
1


[PDF page 20]
2 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
silver inkstands, watches, jewels, and whatever else of value he had, in an
effort to keep him in his home. The symbols of prestige and social order in
Mount Lebanon, hospitality and the serving of coffee, continued in the
house of a wealthy Christian, while outside, Druzes battled Christians and
turned their world upside down.1
When the war ended toward the end of June, some two hundred of an
estimated seven hundred villages were left pillaged, churches and con-
vents had been razed, and Druze religious sanctuaries were desecrated.
The Druzes had carried the day, cleansing whole towns of their Christian
inhabitants. When Muslims in Damascus rioted soon after to protest in-
creasing European influence in their city, thousands more Christians were
slaughtered in the ugliest urban violence of nineteenth-century Syria.
The Sultan of the Ottoman Empire was made to hear what one chronicler
described as the “sighs of Syria.”2 For unlike natural contagions, unlike
the plagues and the locusts, unlike the feuds of old and the palace coups
that somehow always fit into the order of things, the events of 1860 en-
tered bloodstained into the history of the Ottoman East, altering it for-
ever.
In the pages that follow, I reconstruct the history of modern sectarian
identity in Ottoman Mount Lebanon, which provided the stage on which
the cataclysmic violence in 1860 was enacted. The story begins many years
earlier, when local Lebanese society was opened, and indeed opened itself,
to Ottoman and European discourses of reform that made religion the site
of a colonial encounter between a self-styled “Christian” West and what it
saw as its perennial adversary, an “Islamic” Ottoman Empire. This en-
counter profoundly altered the meaning of religion in the multiconfes-
sional society of Mount Lebanon because it emphasized sectarian identity
as the only viable marker of political reform and the only authentic basis
for political claims. The story is of the symbiosis between indigenous tra-
ditions and practices—in which religion was enmeshed in complex social
and political relations—and Ottoman modernization, which became para-
mount in reshaping the political self-definition of each community along
religious lines. From the outset, therefore, it is imperative to dispel any il-
lusion that sectarianism is simply or exclusively a native malignancy or a
foreign conspiracy. Sectarianism can be narrated only by continually ac-
knowledging and referring to both indigenous and imperial histories,
which interacted— both collided and collaborated—to produce a new his-
torical imagination.
Sectarianism is a modern story, and, for those intimately involved in its
unfolding, it is the modern story—a story that has and that continues to


[PDF page 21]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 3
define and dominate their lives. Although this book records a history that
transpires in rural Mount Lebanon, it has many parallels in Ayodhya,
Kosovo, and Belfast. It is all about location in a modern world, where the
margins can become centers. The violence of 1860, as I hope will become
clear, took place not only between Maronite and Druze communities but
also within these communities in an attempt to define their own respective
boundaries in an era of upheaval. I am most interested in this story within
the story: namely the struggle over communal representation that was re-
flected in episodes of intracommunal social violence that constituted a fun-
damental part of broader religious violence across sectarian communities.
In short, I illustrate the contests over the meaning of religion as it entered
the political sphere between 1840 and 1860. I elaborate on the contradic-
tions in, and the failure of, the attempt to create uncomplicated and pure
sectarian identities that were at once private and public, communal and na-
tional, elite and subaltern, modern and traditional.
This task, however, is not easily undertaken precisely because the war-
fare of 1860 and, of course, the destruction of Lebanon in our own times
have given scholars and laypersons alike the distinct impression that the
Lebanese problem is fundamentally tribal, that sectarianism is a disease
that prevents modernization, that Lebanon is, in the final analysis, a
metaphor for a failed nationalism in the non-Western world. What has
been studied (with good reason) has been the geopolitics of conflict, which
has always assumed inert, unchanging sectarian identities. In the after-
math of the strife of 1860, for example, as news of the events trickled into
Istanbul and from there was forwarded to the European capitals, there
emerged a general revulsion at the wholesale massacre of Christian inhab-
itants of the Empire. To a large degree, the reaction of Ottoman statesmen
stemmed from the fact that the two decades before the massacres of 1860
had been a period of Ottoman modernization. Aware of the Ottoman Em-
pire’s image as the “sick man of Europe,” the Sultan and his ministers had
decreed in 1839 that all subjects were equal before the law regardless of
their religion. This move and other reforms in the administration known
collectively as the Tanzimat were calculated to satisfy European demands
for the protection of the Christian communities and to inculcate a notion
of a national and secular subjecthood. The local Christian subjects, in other
words, had become yardsticks of the modernization of the Ottoman Em-
pire: their slaughter dealt the imperial reform process a cruel blow. An ex-
asperated Fuad Pasha, the Ottoman minister for foreign affairs sent to in-
vestigate the massacres, insisted that the conflict in Mount Lebanon was an
“age-old” struggle between tribal communities whose “ignorance” had


[PDF page 22]
Map 1. Syria. (From The Illustrated Atlas, and Modern History of the World,
Geographical, Political, Commercial, and Statistical: Index Gazetteer of the World.
London: John Tallis and Co., 1851)


[PDF page 23]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 5
interrupted the reform movement.3 For their part, Europeans who took
any interest in the affairs of the Ottomans fused the Damascus outbreak in
July and the Lebanese massacres which preceded it in June into a single in-
dication of the primordial passions of the local inhabitants. Karl Marx
mused that the Lebanon events were little more than “atrocious outrages
of wild tribes,” while a French Jesuit publication declared that the events of
1860 were clearly propelled by the Druze “hatred of the Catholic religion
and the fanaticism of the Muslims.”4 For both Europeans and Ottomans
locked in a struggle over the meaning and direction of the reform and
progress of the Ottoman Empire, the events in Syria were in and of them-
selves outside the realm of rationality and history. Rather, as Lord Duf-
ferin, the British aristocrat charged by his government to investigate the
massacres, put it, “Think of what a thousand years have done for England,
France, Germany and the rest of Europe. . . . Then turn to the changeless
East, and behold the contrast. Time there seems almost to be shorn of his
wings, and all things remain as they have ever been.”5
Since the nineteenth century, historians of many different persuasions
have scrutinized these events and have continued to link a rural conflict in
Mount Lebanon to the urban riot in Damascus. In varying degrees, and
with a difference in emphasis, the root causes of the violence have been de-
lineated by scholars consumed with one overriding question: why has the
Middle East failed to modernize, to develop, and most important, to secu-
larize? The foregone conclusion has been that the violence represents the
triumph of tradition, manifested as sectarianism, over the modern ideals of
coexistence and tolerance; and all efforts have gone toward explaining the
conditions under which this so-called tradition could reemerge with such
devastating consequences. Even the most nuanced of analyses assumes
that sectarian identities and mobilizations operate outside of history, that
local inhabitants are either tolerant or intolerant, that there are many so-
cial, economic, or political “root causes” which are historical, but that the
violence which devastated mid-nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon was
only a reaction to these modern historical events, an explosion, a calamity,
above all, an anarchical upsurge of ancient loyalties among unthinking
subjects.6
This scholarly presumption of a religious violence devoid of social and
cultural meaning is reflected (often urgently in countries on the brink of
destruction because of sectarian hostilities) in secular nationalist writing
that seeks to distance itself from moments of extreme religious expres-
sion.7 Turkish historiography, for example, has depicted the troubles in
Mount Lebanon strictly as a consequence of European political intrigue


[PDF page 24]
6 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
against an emerging Turkish (Ottoman) nation.8 For its part, Lebanese and
Arab historiography has blamed Ottoman policies of divide and rule for
the consequent religious divisions that continue to haunt the quest for
Lebanese and Arab unity.9 Both historiographies, in fact, view sectarian vi-
olence as an unwelcome blemish (even a stain) on the nation’s “past” and a
temporary setback on the road to national liberation and modernization.
Moreover, both historiographies consider intercommunal religious strife
to be the ultimate negation of the transhistorical virtues of tolerance, di-
versity, and coexistence, which are supposedly embodied in Turkish and
Arab nationalism. This nationalist approach to sectarianism, which poses a
tolerant and secular modernity against a resurgent religious fundamental-
ism, has itself to be historicized. I do not see the episodes of religious vio-
lence between 1840 and 1860 as symptomatic of the failure of a nation or
nationalism but as an expression of a new form of local politics and knowl-
edge that arose in a climate of transition and reform in the mid-nine-
teenth-century Ottoman Empire and that laid the foundations for a (later)
discourse of nationalist secularism.
While my work necessarily builds on the abundant scholarship on reli-
gious violence and depends on a historical narrative of Ottoman modern-
ization long charted by historians, my goal here is to shift the emphasis
away from narratives which transform victimized communities into Gi-
rardesque scapegoats, available targets of a Muslim backlash motivated pri-
marily by broad economic and political trends, toward a narrative which
returns contingency to a historical process that produced what I call a cul-
ture of sectarianism.
In other words, I understand sectarianism to mean two fundamentally
related things. First, it is a practice that developed out of, and must be un-
derstood in the context of, nineteenth-century Ottoman reform. Second, it
is a discourse that is scripted as the Other to various competing Ottoman,
European, and Lebanese narratives of modernization. Sectarianism
emerged as a practice when Maronite and Druze elites, Europeans and Ot-
tomans struggled to define an equitable relationship of the Druze and
Maronite “tribes” and “nations” to a modernizing Ottoman state. It
emerged when the old regime of Mount Lebanon, which was dominated by
an elite hierarchy in which secular rank rather than religious affiliation de-
fined politics, was discredited in the mid-nineteenth century. The collapse
of the old regime opened up the space for a new form of politics and repre-
sentation based on a language of religious equality. This transformation
privileged the religious community rather than elite status as the basis for


[PDF page 25]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 7
any project of modernization, citizenship, and civilization. Concomitantly,
sectarianism also developed as a discourse—as the set of assumptions and
writings that described this changing subjectivity within a narrative of Ot-
toman, European, and Lebanese modernization.10
Because sectarianism refers to the deployment of religious heritage as a
primary marker of modern political identity, it is important to distinguish
it from religious confrontations that occurred in the medieval and early
modern world (for instance, between Huguenots and Catholics in
France).11 Understood this way, in its modern context, sectarianism can no
longer be taken for granted as a self-evident phenomenon, as it has been
for too long. It cannot be caused by a single event or person, for it is ulti-
mately an act of interpretation that shapes as well as is shaped by religious
mobilizations and violence in the modern world. To appreciate the contin-
gency and complexity of sectarianism as it emerged as both a practice and
a discourse we must investigate the connections between, and the contra-
dictions in, sectarian actions and metaphors deployed by Maronites and
Druzes, elites and nonelites, Ottomans and Westerners.
Since the publication of Ranajit Guha’s seminal essay, “The Prose of
Counter-Insurgency,” and more recently Partha Chatterjee’s study of In-
dian nationalism, scholars have developed a powerful critique of national-
ist assumptions by demonstrating how elitist nationalist knowledge, in-
cluding the depictions of sectarian mobilizations, derive from colonial
logic.12 Yet despite all the focus on the subaltern as a vehicle to criticize the
elitism embedded in nationalist discourse, there has been a tendency to dis-
cuss colonialism and nationalism as fully formed projects that seem to au-
tomatically produce all sorts of resistance.13 Sectarianism as I see it is not
simply a “form of colonialist knowledge” (as Gyanendra Pandey has as-
serted in the context of the historiography of communalism in India) nor a
reality which can be traced to some precolonial past.14 It is, rather, an in-
termingling of both precolonial (before the age of Ottoman reform) and
postcolonial (during and after the age of reform) understandings,
metaphors, and realities that has to be dissected at at least two overlapping
and mutually reinforcing levels, of the elite and nonelite. In other words,
sectarianism is a modernist knowledge in the sense that it was produced in
the context of European hegemony and Ottoman reforms and because its
articulators at a colonial (European), imperial (Ottoman), and local
(Lebanese) level regarded themselves as moderns who used the historical
past to justify present claims and future development. Insofar as sectarian-
ism is indeed a colonialist knowledge, it is also and fundamentally both an


[PDF page 26]
8 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
imperial Ottoman knowledge and a local nationalist knowledge that are
not produced following or in reaction to colonialism but at the same time
as colonialist knowledge.
It follows that the colonial encounter being described here is less a rela-
tion of power mediated by various degrees of resistance than a location of
cultural interaction—a “contact zone”— consciously exploited by the na-
tives for their own material benefit.15 Rather than positing a dichotomy
between colonizer and colonized, where some of the colonized become la-
beled collaborators, it is more fruitful to study colonialism in the case of
the late Ottoman Empire as an arena of exchange, where collaboration is
not simply an act of individual betrayal of the “nation” to a colonial power
but a much more open-ended affair, the norm at a general level rather than
the exception at an individual one. France and Britain did not arrive (in this
case at least) in the Ottoman Empire unannounced, gunboats in harbor, to
“open” the Levant. Instead, Britain, France, and the Ottomans regulated
different aspects of the colonial encounter; this regulation presented the in-
digenous inhabitants of Mount Lebanon with avenues for reinterpreting
their own history, their own communal self-definition, and ultimately
their own rigid social order. Power, of course, was crucial because the en-
counter was never equal; the flow of transformative ideologies and prac-
tices headed mostly from Istanbul, Paris, and London to Mount Lebanon,
where the consequence of this exchange, sectarianism as both a knowledge
and a practice, was produced.
the context of reform
The imperial discourses of reform that encroached on Mount Lebanon
sprang from two distinct sources. Generally speaking, the first was Euro-
pean and the second Ottoman; their simultaneous arrival in Mount
Lebanon in the mid-nineteenth century heralded the beginnings of its sec-
tarian question. For the European statesmen who pored over maps of the
unreformed and unconquered Ottoman Empire, the idea of intervention in
the affairs of the Ottomans was integrally linked to the notions of philan-
thropy, despotism, and freedom that were most forcefully and eloquently
formulated in the nineteenth century.16 In an age when classical Oriental-
ism was giving way to Thomas Macaulay’s polemics on India, when Eu-
rope’s military, economic, and industrial developments were thought to
stem from a civilizational and cultural (as well as racial) superiority, it was
perhaps inevitable that the Ottoman Empire’s vast territories were con-
fronted with what John Stuart Mill characterized as the sacred duty of in-


[PDF page 27]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 9
tervention in “nations which are still barbarous” where it was “likely to be
for their own benefit that they should be conquered and held in subjection
by foreigners.”17
To Mill and to other European thinkers of his time, colonial rule offered
the most effective method of ensuring the spread of civilization. In their
minds, Christian European despotism was strategic and measured, an ex-
tension of European civilization, whereas Oriental despotism was under-
stood as fanatical and all-encompassing, not an extension but the essence
of Asian civilization. In the enactment of colonial rule in India, as in Egypt,
therefore, a “positive” European despotism was summoned to crush the
older and more entrenched “Asiatic” despotism. European intervention
was progressive in the sense that, as Marx phrased it, England forcibly
brought about the “regeneration” of India by destroying its prehistory—
that is, the history of endlessly recurring dynastic despotism.18 The lan-
guage of reform informed a whole spectrum of European involvement
with the non-European world as Europeans attempted to right what they
perceived to be wrong, immoral, and injurious to the natural flow of hu-
man history.19
In the Ottoman Empire, however, the debate over intervention and
nonintervention took a most interesting turn. Although the empire was
not formally colonized by European powers, colonial ideologies were very
much in place, legitimizing the use of overwhelming force (at Navarino in
1827, for instance) to force the Ottomans to comply with European pres-
sure.20 Not surprisingly, an ample stock of racial and cultural stereotypes
clearly demarcated the Ottoman as inferior, premodern, and corrupt, at
best a “wily barbarian.”21 But there was also a realization, following what
Metternich termed the “frightful catastrophe” at Navarino, that the Ot-
tomans could be pushed only so far, that their sovereignty could be com-
promised only so much before they were left too weak to defend them-
selves from foreign invasion.22 The problem that presented itself,
therefore, was how to bring “advancement” to the Empire without dis-
rupting the European balance of power.
For European statesmen and historians, the reformation of the Ot-
toman Empire stemmed almost entirely from Europe’s sense of civilizing
mission.23 “Europe is at hand,” declared Stratford Canning, one of the self-
proclaimed architects of Ottoman reforms, “with its science, its labour, and
its capital. The Koran, the harem, and a Babel of languages, are no doubt so
many obstacles to advancement in a Western sense.”24 Religion, as I have
already mentioned, became the site of the colonial encounter in the Ot-
toman Empire in that European officials defined the parameters of reform


[PDF page 28]
10 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
through a modernization discourse couched in terms of a religious civiliza-
tional clash. Both the problem (Islam) and the solution (European Chris-
tian rationality) were defined in monolithic religious terms. Furthermore,
diplomats like Canning imagined the Empire not so much as a multiethnic
and multireligious territory but as a Muslim state with large “minorities”
of Christians scattered in various cities and provinces. This understanding
of the Empire as a “mosaic” where ethnic and religious groups existed as
separate and autonomous cultural and physical units was embedded in
Canning’s description of the local Christians as the “subjugated classes.”25
To “free” the native Christians, the ambassadors and consuls of the Great
Powers spoke on their behalf, plucked them from the obscurity (and com-
plexity) of their everyday existence, and depicted them simply as the vic-
tims of unbending Muslim dominion. As a result, and in spite of the fact
that European consuls and missionaries bewailed the “degenerate” nature
of Oriental Christianity and its bigoted and uneducated priesthood, they
nevertheless considered the local Christian populations as barometers by
which to measure the success or failure of reform.26
Ottoman statesmen broached the problem of reform from an altogether
different trajectory. As they were elaborated in 1839 and 1856, the reforms
pursued by the Sublime Porte represented a fundamentally imperial proj-
ect of centralization and an effort to build an avowedly modern state. After
the eighteenth century, which had witnessed fragmentation of imperial
control, new laws were called for to improve security, end corruption, ra-
tionalize taxation, and regularize army service. Following the rise of
Mehmed Ali, in fact in direct response to the threat posed to the empire by
its rebellious vassal in the 1830s, Sultan Abdülmecid proclaimed the Gül-
hane edict in 1839.27 The basic aim of the Gülhane decree and others which
followed, known collectively as the Tanzimat, was to reform the adminis-
tration and reorganize the Empire in an effort to maintain its territorial in-
tegrity. It stipulated an equitable taxation of subjects according to their
means and pledged to ensure their security and property. It also specifi-
cally declared the juridical equality of all subjects—hence the equality of
Muslims with Christians— but framed this bold declaration within a dis-
course of a revitalization of Islamic tradition. The underlying assumption
of the Tanzimat was that reforms could be enacted without any mediation
from the outside world, that the Sultan’s will was absolute, and that all his
subjects did not participate in any decision making but partook of his im-
perial benevolence. The Gülhane decree of 1839 reinforced the notion of
the Sultan as a fair arbitrator for all his subjects. From an Ottoman stand-
point the Gülhane proclamation did not herald a negation of the past as


[PDF page 29]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 11
much as it sought to set a new direction by advocating a secular Ottoman
subjecthood within a modernized yet extremely hierarchical Islamic state.
The Tanzimat looked both forward and backward and encompassed both
old and new. Thus, even as European statesmen insisted that the Tanzimat
ushered in a new era of rational government that necessarily abandoned an
allegedly archaic, immoral, and stagnant Oriental culture, the Ottomans
understood the Tanzimat as a vehicle to enter the modern world with a
conserved and modernized tradition.28
Although reforming Ottoman statesmen tried to redefine their empire
as an Islamic state within an orbit of friendly foreign powers (düvel-i
fahime ve mülakat-ı dostane), they were still confronted with the problem
of elaborating a notion of modern Ottoman sovereignty in an age of Euro-
pean hegemony. At no point in its history was the Empire more vulnera-
ble than at this critical moment of transition, when Mehmed Ali’s armies
threatened the Empire with dismemberment and the Russian armies had
marched to the outskirts of Istanbul. And at no point had the European
powers ever assembled as much data or as many facts and anecdotes re-
garding the perceived oppression of the native Christians. The upshot was
that just as the Ottomans were moving away from a vaguely defined mil-
let system, in which the Sunni Muslims were treated as socially and cul-
turally superior to the other communities of the Empire, and were moving
toward a more integrative form of government, the Europeans favored and
intervened on behalf of the Christians.29
Such contradictions were most apparent in regions like Mount Lebanon,
which was home to a large Christian population. Long neglected by Ot-
toman officials as a backwater of the imperial domains, Mount Lebanon’s
biblical landscape appealed to foreign missionaries while its similarity to
the Highlands moved British (especially Scottish) travelers, and its al-
legedly counterrevolutionary spirituality attracted those refugees fleeing
from the secularization of France.30 Perceived by European powers as a
mountain refuge in which they had a historical, religious, and increasingly
strategic stake, nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon became the location
for a host of competing armies and ideologies and for totally contradictory
interpretations of the meaning of reform. This context of flux created the
conditions for sectarianism to arise not as a coherent force but as a reflec-
tion of fractured identities, pulled hither and thither by the enticements
and coercions of Ottoman and European power. Mount Lebanon at mid-
century was a peripheral region drawn toward multiple metropoles. The
European powers promoted their Christianity as a method of access to the
indigenous people, while the Ottoman state relied on the tenuous bonds of


[PDF page 30]
12 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
loyalty (or such that theoretically existed) of a marginal population that
inhabited the fringes of the imperial imagination. In recognition of their
sudden elevation to a matter of international concern, the people of Mount
Lebanon actively participated in the struggle over modernity. They were as
transformed as their surroundings. They took advantage of the presence of
the various imperial powers by declaring themselves to be both European
protégés and loyal Ottoman subjects. But they were themselves con-
fronted by a latent contradiction in the Gülhane decree that became more
apparent as it was translated across the social spectrum and as it traveled
from center to periphery: the contradiction between a notion of equality
before the law regardless of rank and station that was guaranteed by the
state and a rigid adherence to a hierarchical and inviolable social order,
without which there could be no state. Because the Tanzimat was gener-
ated in the nebulous space between an imperial will and the colonial inter-
ventions of several European powers, there were several understandings,
translations, and fragmentations of imperial discourses of reform as they
traveled from center to periphery and back again.31 The story of sectarian-
ism that I have chosen to tell, therefore, is one of divergent local under-
standings of the imperial reform process that both reaffirmed local order
and subverted it in the years leading up to, and including, 1860.
sources and structure of argument
Like most historians of the nineteenth century, I am faced with a prolific
colonial archive which has quite literally dominated the writing of Middle
Eastern history. The plethora of missionary accounts, consular reports,
travelogues, accounts of scientific expeditions, and personal memoirs con-
stitute an undeniably rich historical record. The question of how to read
such sources productively (a task made immeasurably easier following the
publication of Edward Said’s Orientalism) in order to script a story of sec-
tarianism that their authors would never have countenanced is certainly
one goal of this book. But to read Charles Churchill’s The Druze and Mar-
onites under the Turkish Rule against the grain—to contextualize (and at
the same time dispute) the power of his claim “to fathom the pervading
mind, as it were, of the two great sects” of Mount Lebanon—recourse
must be made to the available indigenous archive.32 Unlike many histori-
ans who study what Hugh Trevor-Roper once mocked as “the unreward-
ing gyrations of barbarous tribes in picturesque but irrelevant corners of
the globe,” I am fortunate to have before me a wealth of largely untapped
Ottoman and Lebanese materials.33 I say untapped because although most


[PDF page 31]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 13
of these sources are known to historians and many of them have been used
to great effect, they have been utilized in one of two restricted fashions. Ei-
ther they are read to produce a “native” account to be examined alongside
Churchill’s, or they are deployed to counter Churchill’s narrative with the
aim of replacing it with a more authentic (and often nationalist) rendition
of events. Neither of these approaches is satisfactory, for they do not ex-
ploit the richness embedded within Churchill’s narrative, nor do they even
begin to explore the complexity of the local sources. To do both, to read
colonial history juxtaposed with its imperial Ottoman and local Lebanese
counterparts and to make them together divulge the layers, the contin-
gency, and the contradictions of the modernity of sectarianism is to do
them at the same time. Therefore, this book constantly weaves back and
forth between a variety of sources, constructing a narrative out of the in-
terplay of their differences.
The next two chapters contrast European perceptions of Mount
Lebanon as a mountainous refuge indomitably holding out against an Is-
lamic despotism (Chapter 2) with local understandings of Mount Lebanon’s
rural world, in which a hierarchy of notables dominated a social order at
the periphery of the Ottoman Empire (Chapter 3). Chapter 4 illustrates
how conflicting notions of reform, in an era of Eastern Question politics,
undermined the traditional order. Then I investigate how Mount Lebanon
was reinvented in sectarian terms by rival elites after the Europeans and
Ottomans decided to partition it along religious lines in 1842 (Chapter 5),
only to suggest an alternative reading of the emerging sectarian landscape
(Chapter 6); this chapter examines the role and proclamations of Tanyus
Shahin, the leader of a Maronite peasant uprising in 1859, to demonstrate
the limits and possibilities of popular interpretations of Ottoman reform.
The point is to interpret the sectarian violence in 1860 not as a tribal erup-
tion (as Ottoman and European observers would have it) but as an integral
part of the redefinition of new communal and social boundaries (Chapter
7). Chapter 8 analyzes the state-sponsored violence unleashed by Ottoman
officials following 1860 with the full support of the European powers as a
final (and successful) attempt to reestablish social order and to suppress
the popular interpretations of reform, thereby leaving the local elites (and
their Ottoman and European guardians) as the only “legitimate” players in
formal politics. In the Epilogue, I discuss the relationship between sectari-
anism and nationalism, underscoring my contention that sectarianism as
an idea draws meaning only within a nationalist paradigm and hence that
it belongs to our modern world.
Although I use a rough chronological narrative that makes obligatory


[PDF page 32]
14 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
stops at the major turning points of the era, including the Egyptian inva-
sion of Syria in 1831, the uprising against the Egyptians in 1839 and the
Ottoman restoration of 1840, the partition of Mount Lebanon in 1842, the
Kisrawan rebellion of 1858 –1859, and the war of 1860, the point here is
not to retell what is already a well-known narrative of local history. I do
not delve into many episodes of violence (for example, those of 1845), just
as I do not fully explore many angles (such as the economic). Instead, I
have deliberately chosen to focus on one theme of a complex history, the
construction of sectarianism as an idea and its beginnings as a practice in
Mount Lebanon. For this reason, the argument developed here deliberately
eschews any comparison between the violence in 1860 Mount Lebanon
with other intercommunal hostilities, such as those of Aleppo in 1850 or
even those of Damascus in 1860, primarily because the cases of Aleppo and
Damascus had little relevance to the events in Mount Lebanon, which as an
autonomous rural region enjoyed its own specificities and its own cultural
and historical trajectory.34 My cutoff date of 1860 is not at all meant to in-
dicate a closure to the question of sectarian identity. Instead, I consider it
the end of the foundational period of a sectarian culture that continued
through the late Ottoman period and into the nationalist era.
My emphasis on Druzes and Maronites, as opposed to Orthodox Chris-
tians or Shi‘a, is done with some trepidation, although it is justified by the
fact that they were the two principal communities of Mount Lebanon in-
volved in sectarian violence. Whenever possible, I have tried to utilize doc-
uments from the period itself. The extremely rich archives of the Maronite
patriarchate proved invaluable, and recourse to the Bas¸bakanlık (Ottoman)
archives, where thousands of Ottoman and Arabic documents on Mount
Lebanon are preserved, as well as to the British and French consular corre-
spondence and a variety of missionary sources helped illuminate the layers
of sectarian identity with which I am centrally concerned.
My greatest disappointment, however, is that I have not been able to
write about the sectarian aspirations of the Druze community. This left-
out account, I must also acknowledge from the beginning, is the crucial as-
pect of the history that must one day be unearthed before the tale of sec-
tarianism can be told in its fullest sense. A relatively poor Druze
historiography has forced me to rely on the Abu Shaqra chronicle Al-
Harakat fi Lubnan ila ‘ahd al-Mutasarrifiyya, which was narrated, tran-
scribed, and edited several decades after 1860.35 I have had to choose be-
tween telling an incomplete history and not telling it at all. I have chosen
to tell what I can.


[PDF page 33]
2 The Gentle Crusade
The sailors, smiling, point out to me Mount Lebanon; . . . I looked
up to the skies, and beheld the white and gilded crest of the Sannin
floating in the firmament over out heads. The fog prevented my
observing its base and sides. Its head alone appeared, bright and
serene in the blue sky. It occasioned one of the most sublime and
sweetest impressions I ever felt in my travels. It was the land to
which were directed all my present thoughts as a man and a
traveller; the sacred land, the land where I sought, from so great a
distance, the recollections of our primitive human nature.
Alphonse de Lamartine, A Pilgrimage to the Holy Land (1838)
Their spirit instinctively warns the passerby that he is amongst a
race of freemen.
Charles H. Churchill, Mount Lebanon: A Ten Years’
Residence, from 1842 to 1852 (1853)
”W
ho dares be skeptical at the foot of Lebanon?” asked Gérard de Ner-
val, French traveler and author of Voyage en Orient. “Is this shore not the
cradle of all the beliefs in the world? Ask the first Mountaineer that you
come across: he will tell you that it was on this land that the first scenes of
the Bible took place; he will guide you to the place where the first sacrifices
were offered; he will show you the rock stained by the blood of Abel.”1 For
the very reasons that Nerval identified—the biblical landscape, the stun-
ning beauty of the mountain chain overlooking Beirut, which appeared to
be an inviolate sanctuary—Europeans viewed Mount Lebanon as an ideal
site for the reformation of the Ottoman Empire. What their eyes took in as
they contemplated the panorama of mountain and sea was not “a terra
incognita.”2 Modern technology, through the production of texts and their
distribution to a wide audience; improved communications; and fast ships,
which transported painters and poets in record numbers, brought the Ori-
ent into the homes of “Christian readers” on an unprecedented scale in the
nineteenth century. Writings and paintings evoked a timeless biblical land,
a mountain refuge, that pleaded to be saved from Islamic Ottoman domi-
nation.3 The parallel lack of interest in Mount Lebanon on the part of Ot-
15


[PDF page 34]
16 / The Gentle Crusade
tomans gave European travelers room to explore without hindrance from
imperial officials. More important, it left them as the unchallenged
prophets of the cultural redemption and salvation of Mount Lebanon.
Between poets and writers such as Nerval, who exuded a supreme con-
fidence in European hegemony, and missionaries such as Paul Riccadonna
and Benoît Planchet, who strove to be the benevolent face of that hege-
mony, Mount Lebanon found itself the object of intense, sustained atten-
tion by a host of diverse suitors. Some were content to describe and cele-
brate the land as they saw it; others wanted to save and reform its
inhabitants; most tried their hand at both. In any case, the cumulative
presence on the land of so many Western writers, travelers, missionaries,
painters, and poets heralded the dawn of a gentle crusade in Mount
Lebanon. It was gentle in the sense that it was not a military expedition: it
sought no territorial gain; it was actively courted by native elites, and it ad-
vanced itself primarily through the pen and paintbrush rather than the
sword and musket. It was a crusade in the sense that the sum of the travel-
ers’ experiences allegedly reclaimed the history of this region from the
morass of decline and the stagnation of time. It was a crusade also in the
sense that most travelers imagined themselves to be involved in a historic
clash between Christian progress and Islamic despotism, a clash in which
they alone held the keys to knowledge and interpretation. They insisted
that they narrated and judged with the experience of natives but that such
authenticity was tempered by the “superiority of a European who looks
down from the height of Christian civilization.”4 Finally, it was a crusade
because travelers and missionaries were the vanguard of an age of reform
that in the name of modernity quite simply overwhelmed Mount Lebanon.
The gentle crusade was premised on the notion that the Ottoman Em-
pire delenda est (as Richard Burton put it).5 But it was also rooted in the
conviction that certain communities in it could be redeemed through the
active intercession of the “civilized” world. One result, therefore, of indi-
vidual voyages undertaken by men like Constantin de Volney, Charles
Henry Churchill, and Alphonse de Lamartine as well as of the collective ef-
forts of Jesuit and Protestant missionaries was a crystallization of the idea
that the natives of Mount Lebanon were waiting to be reformed and re-
connected with what Johannes Fabian has described as the evolutionary
“stream of Time.”6 Another result (whose consequences will be taken up
in later chapters) was that it laid the foundations of a Maronite and (to a
lesser extent) Druze perception that France and England were the loci of a
benevolent modernity and that they, as Maronites or Druzes, were entitled
to it. How this gentle crusade was articulated by its participants and why it


[PDF page 35]
The Gentle Crusade / 17
should have—as David Urquhart put it—“withdrawn [Mount Lebanon]
from an existence of insignificance” are questions that this chapter ex-
plores.7
Travelers had long come to the biblical lands, but in the late eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries their arrival coincided with, even reflected,
broader developments both in Europe and the Ottoman Empire that cre-
ated a solid basis for the travelers’ claims to be heralds of modernity to the
“tribes” of Mount Lebanon.8 Drawing on an established motif of Mount
Lebanon as a pristine refuge, these visitors exhibited a heightened cultural
interest in the region that was set against the backdrop of Syria’s incorpo-
ration into a European-dominated world economy and the momentous
changes ushered in by the French and Industrial Revolutions.9 In Mount
Lebanon’s rural inhabitants, the travelers saw revolutionaries and counter-
revolutionaries, papists and highlanders—in short, all that related them to
the dynamism of European history. At the same time, however, the travel-
ers paradoxically insisted that Maronites and Druzes belonged to an inert
world that was surrounded, and to some extent contaminated, by an Ori-
ental decadence.
narratives of stagnation and redemption
Among the most famous of the travelers was Volney, whose influential
portrait of Mount Lebanon shaped much of the romantic discourse of nine-
teenth-century travel writing. Left with an unexpected bequest of money,
Volney chose to visit the Orient, beginning in Egypt and moving on to
Syria and Mount Lebanon. During his two-year voyage between 1783 to
1785, Volney spent eight months in Mount Lebanon.
On the face of it, Volney’s work, Voyage en Égypte et en Syrie, was sim-
ply the first of the great works of modern travel writing and description.10
Certainly, as Edward Said has argued, Volney’s portraits were to have a
tremendous impact on later voyagers and travelers who, almost to a per-
son, cite him, applaud him, and occasionally correct him.11 Volney was a
man of the Enlightenment. His work was suffused with its vocabulary, and
his humanism motivated him to travel to Asia to better understand the na-
ture of “despotism,” under which his native France labored. His arguments
about the nature of the Orient and the Orientals provided a ready stage
from which to criticize France’s absolute monarchy. His vehement denun-
ciations of the upper Maronite clergy were in obvious but unstated com-
parison to the corrupt First Estate. Taking his brief stay as a sufficient
length of time to judge the character and nature of the Orient, Volney


[PDF page 36]
Map 2. Carte d’une partie de la Syrie et de la Palestine (From Pierre Marie François Pagès, Voyages autour du monde
et vers les deux poles, par terre et par mer, pendant les années 1767, 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1773, 1774, & 1776. Paris:
Moutard, 1782)


[PDF page 37]
The Gentle Crusade / 19
wove an epic narrative—never for a moment questioning his own tran-
sience and, in fact, criticizing those travelers who were more concerned
with the antiquities than with the people.12 His central question was how
such splendid power in Asia could deteriorate so fast and under what con-
ditions its decline could be arrested.
He found his answer in the nature of government and religion. To Vol-
ney, the results of political despotism were obvious. In the Orient, there
was a total absence of the notion of public good among the “Turks,” for in
Volney’s eyes the pashas were rapacious, and everybody was the Sultan’s
slave. The reason for the “indolence” of the Oriental, despite his
“lethargy,” his “silence,” and his “inscrutability,” was the despotism of the
Sultan. In addition, however, there was the question of “Islam.” Volney
claimed the Oriental’s “fanatic superstition” was the cause for a “thousand
disorders.” Moreover, unlike “us” in Europe, where Volney assumed there
was free communication between the sexes, he insisted that in the Orient
women were shut off from society. The harem, stated Volney, was as fatal
to the moral conduct of the men in whose hand political power rested, as it
was injurious to the women.13
Only in Mount Lebanon did he see the “ray of liberty” breaking
through the cloud of Turkish and Oriental despotism. Put up in various
monasteries by Maronites who welcomed the Frenchman in their midst,
Volney described the reasons for the persistence in the East of the Chris-
tian Maronites. He saw first the “insurmountable barrier” between Maro-
nites and Muslims, which prevented the ambitious Maronites from unit-
ing with “the stranger” to betray their nation. He also argued that the
difficulty of the terrain and the imperative to unite in the face of enemies
pushed the Maronites into a rocky outpost. To Volney, Mount Lebanon
was a haven from Islam, in which the Druzes too enjoyed the benefits of
their relatively isolated existence. Volney remarked that the Druzes nur-
tured a “republican spirit” but that both they and the Maronites were con-
stantly under threat from the corrupting influence of absolute Ottoman
power.14
Amidst the supposed stagnation of Syria, Volney thought he discerned
timeless communities who yearned to be free and to be set on the path of
progress. Volney thought Mount Lebanon unique because of its non-Mus-
lim population, its relation to the Holy Land, and its mountainous and
rugged terrain, which provided a welcome contrast, in his eyes, to the
coastal cities and their Muslim populations. He was not alone in making
this observation. The flamboyant Churchill reiterated exactly this point
when he noted that the mountaineers had “a determination and a spirit of


[PDF page 38]
20 / The Gentle Crusade
independence, which unequivocally indicate that the metal of freemen is
lurking within their breasts.”15 Yet Volney was careful to point out that
Mount Lebanon’s uniqueness had been contaminated by its proximity to
Islam. According to the French writer, to free and to reform Mount
Lebanon was to reincarnate a distant past which he claimed to represent on
the basis of a shared Christian heritage and which he desired to reinvigo-
rate at the expense of a more recent, darker, and more unfamiliar history.
Volney, therefore, was at once drawn to and repulsed by Mount Lebanon—
both at home in and alienated from it.
Other travelers elaborated on this theme of stagnation and redemption.
Churchill, for example, framed the task as leading the Orient from the
stagnant present, literally from the dearth of hope and the death of time, to
a future filled with promise and progress:
This East, which may yet become seat and centre of the Universal
Reign!, it also has claims on England’s watchful vigilance and sympa-
thising care, and already invokes her guardian Æegis.
A general, and possibly not incorrect belief is now prevalent, that a
revolution of hitherto unprecedented magnitude is closely impending
over these interesting regions; one by which they will at length be made
amenable to the vivifying impulses of social and political amelioration—
16
one in fact, which will deliver them from the bonds of death unto life.
Concern for the fate of the region’s Christian (and to a lesser extent
Druze) inhabitants propelled men like Volney and Churchill to study and
decipher the customs and manners of the natives. As in other travel ac-
counts of Europeans in the New World, in Asia, and in Africa, the manners
and customs were described as unchanging and hence easily recordable.
Churchill apologized in advance to his readers, explaining that the “con-
stant repetition of events so nearly similar in their form and complexion,
the perpetual recurrence of actuating motives, so invariably the same in all
parties concerned, made it difficult for me to be correct and full, without
being monotonous.”17 Even critics of European imperialism, such as
Urquhart, felt compelled to describe Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants as “a
primordial society.” “Its children,” he noted, “looked down on events in
their course, races in their toil, and ignored history by defying fortune.”18
Neither Volney nor Churchill conceived of themselves as strangers
among the Maronites. Certainly Volney cast himself as the omniscient ob-
jective narrator on one level, but on another he felt some connection with
the people of Mount Lebanon; he could extend to them a sympathy that he
felt he could not extend to the Muslims of the Orient. In fact, he felt that


[PDF page 39]
The Gentle Crusade / 21
the Muslims who lived in the Orient were “strangers” to the Maronites,
while he as a Frenchman was not. Here lay the central paradox of all Vol-
ney’s writings on the Orient. Although he was aligned against political
despotism and was opposed to the tyranny of entrenched Catholicism, Vol-
ney’s preoccupation with Islam’s difference from Christianity pushed him
in the direction of those religious communities which he perceived to be
the farthest from Islam. In his opinion, which he elaborated on in his later
work, Les Ruines, ou méditation sur les révolutions des empires, suivies de
la loi naturelle, salvation could come only from a rational, republican, even
revolutionary France and could take root in Mount Lebanon.
The French Revolution, however, never arrived in the Orient. Instead,
on the one hand, Napoleon invaded Egypt masquerading as a Muslim—
much to the disdain of the Egyptian chronicler Jabarti—and, on the other
hand, Lazarist priests and other refugees came seeking the “sanctuary” of
Mount Lebanon, where they waited out the “evil days” of the French Rev-
olution.19 Contrary to Volney’s hopes, France did not provide a revolution-
ary death blow to “Oriental despotism.” Drawing on France’s historic ties
with the Maronites, priests and émigré princes came to take shelter among
the people they had vowed to protect.20 As they wandered through Mount
Lebanon, climbed the slopes, and descended into the valleys, they lived the
counterrevolution. They too wanted to save Mount Lebanon, but unlike
Volney they desired to save it both from itself and from the scourge of the
Revolution. They brought with them their fears of Freemasons and of Jews
and added to those the greatest of all fears, that of Islam. In the “refuge” of
Lebanon, the ancien régime survived and even flourished. The local Chris-
tian chroniclers had heard with great dismay that the “gates of hell have
opened and the Lord of Darkness has emerged.”21 They welcomed to their
land the victims of the great calamity, encouraged by the fact that post-
revolutionary French governments generally instructed their ambassadors
in Istanbul to protect the missions and the missionaries.22
Into this environment, where Europeans lived “like a colony totally re-
moved from the laws of the land,”23 the poet Alphonse de Lamartine ar-
rived in 1832. For him the “refuge” of Lebanon provided a secure base
from which to conduct his “pilgrimage” to the Holy Land.24 Lamartine re-
lated to the East through his familiarity with New and Old Testament nar-
ratives, and his experience in the East became a journey of recovery and
immersion in specific Christian icons, symbols, and terrain. Lamartine was
no ordinary traveler, for he recognized that his observations were “neither
science, nor history, nor geography nor customs” but “fragments” written
in the shadow of a palm tree in the midday sun or in the cell of a Maronite


[PDF page 40]
22 / The Gentle Crusade
convent. Lamartine left the turmoil of politics and the corruption of ideals
behind him in France. He escaped, as he put it, from an unspiritual and
“crumbling Europe.”25
Lamartine believed that in Mount Lebanon the battle for Christianity
and for spirituality could be fought and won. He thought that a new Chris-
tian could be born and a new spirituality could be fostered which would ul-
timately save Europe from its own destructive “passions.” The passive
Orient, “a sterile and dead branch of humanity,” could be used; its vast
space could be harnessed; and its distinctively Christian Maronite popula-
tion could be the vanguard of a spiritual renaissance. “The Maronite peo-
ple, be they descended from Arabs or Syrians, share all the virtues of their
clergy, and constitute a people distinct from all others in the Orient, one
might say a European colony haphazardly cast into the midst of desert
tribes. Their personal appearance, however, is Arab.”26
Lamartine’s first glimpses of the Holy Land on the afternoon of 5 Sep-
tember 1832 left him overwhelmed with the emotions of a homecoming.
“It was the Holy Land,” he scribbled in his diary, and that said it all. When
the “Arabs” carried him to shore at Beirut, Lamartine was met by a con-
sular agent sent by Henri Guys, to whom Lamartine carried a letter of in-
troduction. During his visit, Lamartine was given the title of “the foreign
prince” by local inhabitants. While he gloried in “the titles, riches, and the
virtues which the Arab imagination has given me,” the French poet con-
fessed that the European consuls “are good enough not to disabuse them,
and to let a humble poet pass for a powerful man of Europe.”27
Perhaps even more than Lamartine, Lady Hester Stanhope, William
Pitt’s troubled niece—who was described in a local chronicle as “the
daughter of the sister of the English sultan’s vizier”28—represented the at-
tempt of European writers and travelers to escape from Europe and to take
refuge in the supposedly timeless fastness of Mount Lebanon. Lamartine
himself had heard much about this enigmatic lady, who came from a bro-
ken household, whose father was a pronounced Jacobin sympathizer, and
who allegedly found herself suffocating in the restrictions of Victorian so-
ciety.29 She liberally bestowed money on a large number of functionaries,
and she was consequently well received. It was even said that she was un-
der the protection of the Sultan himself.30 She was, with her shaven head,
her habit of smoking pipes, and her cross-dressing, a parody of the wan-
dering European. She insisted on proclaiming herself “Queen of the
Arabs,” and Lamartine himself said that “she has a great name in the Ori-
ent.” He added “I considered that among the most interesting days of my
voyage were those in which I got to know a woman who is herself one of


[PDF page 41]
The Gentle Crusade / 23
the marvels of the Orient that I had come to visit.”31 She styled herself
Zenobia’s successor and surrounded herself with servants and slaves whom
she called a “pack of thieves.”32 That William Pitt’s estranged niece had
come to represent the Orient which Lamartine sought out was sympto-
matic of the self-contained European fantasy which no local could pene-
trate. Lady Hester, when she finally met Lamartine, was dressed in “Ori-
ental” costume and insisted that her own female housekeeper be veiled.
She told the poet what he already knew. “Europe is finished. . . . You will,”
she continued between deep drags of her favorite amber pipe, “go back to
the Occident, but it will not be long before you return to the Orient—for
it is your patrie.” To this Lamartine philosophically repled, “It is at least,
the patrie of my imagination.”33
inventing tribes
European imagination invented the tribes of Lebanon. While most ac-
counts reminisced about a biblical topography, they invariably enumerated
and described the different communities that lived in Mount Lebanon. The
success of Volney, Lamartine, Churchill, and Jesuit and American mission-
aries depended on creating a coherent typology of Maronites, Druzes,
Greek Orthodox, Shi‘a, Sunni, and Greek Catholics. Naturally, they bor-
rowed freely from one another, and they filtered their own varied experi-
ences through a common conceptual language of native difference and sep-
arateness—so that although Druzes and Maronites often lived in the same
village, shared the same customs, and owed allegiance to the same nota-
bles, they were nevertheless described separately in Western literature and
therefore were imagined and experienced separately in Mount Lebanon.
The various explorers and missionaries constructed, in other words, a dis-
course of Mount Lebanon’s tribal characteristics, say of Druze bellicosity,
which was largely self-referential (Churchill borrows from Volney, Jessup
from Churchill). This discourse existed and was distributed textually and
reinforced anecdotally, and from the outset it framed and enmeshed every
traveler’s experience.34 I am not suggesting that these religious communi-
ties did not exist or that travelers’ accounts were false or fabricated, but in-
stead that they were conceptualized in certain terms (tribal, free, stagnant,
separate) that did not correspond to the way the inhabitants of Mount
Lebanon perceived themselves. Such a discourse, which traditional native
knowledge could scarcely penetrate, had a tremendous impact on local so-
ciety as nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon became the venue for com-
peting Ottoman and European notions of reform and progress.


[PDF page 42]
24 / The Gentle Crusade
The British and American characterization of the Druzes illustrated one
facet of the incommensurability of Western and local understandings of
Mount Lebanon. The British authors thought themselves particularly well
suited, because of their intimate connections and conversations with the
Druze elites, to represent them to Western audiences. Certainly French
travelers, especially in the beginning of the century, took an active interest
in the Druzes, who were in some accounts considered to be the descendants
of a Latin colony led by the Comte de Dreux, just as British and other trav-
elers did not shy away from Maronite regions. As the century advanced
and as the region was further drawn into the vicissitudes of rival mission-
ary movements and the politics of the so-called Eastern Question, the
French increasingly traveled, resided, and felt most comfortable in the
Maronite parts of Lebanon, whereas the Protestant travelers explored and
recommended the hospitality of the Druzes with increasing vigor.
The Druzes were objects of a curious sympathy which, on the one hand,
elevated them to the ranks of freemen and, on the other hand, regarded
them as the most romantic of the Lebanese tribes. “The physiognomy of
the Druse,” wrote one author, “is noble, grave, and sometimes even char-
acterised by an expression of high spirit not untinctured with ferocity.”35
American missionaries, who were themselves continually haunted by their
failure to produce enough converts among the “nominal” Christians of
Mount Lebanon, sent home ever rosier reports of the potential for a mass
conversion among the Druzes. Accordingly, the Druzes were described in
the following manner in the Missionary Herald in 1838: “The Druses, al-
though inconsiderable as to number, are a remarkable sect, (1). As an ex-
crescence of Mohammedanism, having somewhat the same relation to Mo-
hammedans that the Mohammedans have to Christians; (2). As holding
very peculiar doctrines, which have not yet been revealed, except partially;
and (3). As maintaining a free and independent spirit in the midst of des-
potism, owing perhaps to the mountainous nature of their country.”36
The force of such a description, which was culled from a variety of
sources including Volney, lay not only in the effort to make the Druzes
comprehensible to the Missionary Herald readers in terms that quite
clearly would have made no sense to a Druze but also in the implicit as-
sumption that this was the only way to understand the Druzes. Whereas a
Druze might have thought that his religion was coherent, the missionaries
noted that it was little more than an “excrescence” or, as they put it in
1836, “a compound of paganism, Mohammedanism, and Christianity.”
Whereas he might have considered himself part of a complex, living,
evolving multicommunal culture, the missionaries viewed him as a mem-


[PDF page 43]
The Gentle Crusade / 25
ber of a “singular race” in a divided sectarian and tribal society.37 For their
part, British writers often sought to identify the Druzes with the Scottish
highlanders.38 “The gathering of the clans, as described by Volney, an eye-
witness,” suggested one author, “forcibly reminds us of the speeding of the
fiery cross in former days along the braes and glens of Scotland.”39 Even
beyond resembling the highlanders, the Druzes themselves, the travelers
alleged, boasted that a branch of the Druze people lived in “Jebel-el-
Scouzia,” or the Scottish Highlands.40 Urquhart claimed to have found
amongst the Lebanese (even though it was in a Christian village) a “per-
fect” tartan of ancient usage which resembled that of the Stuarts.41 The
weapons that the villagers of Mount Lebanon carried also reminded some
British travelers of the highlanders.42 Churchill regarded both the Maro-
nites and the Druzes as “sturdy Highlanders. 43
English and Scottish accounts of Mount Lebanon constructed a mythic
image of the Druze chieftain, who was the authors’ only contact with the
local population, as a highland clan leader. This image provided the writers
with an “authentic” source who could stand for the whole of this “warlike”
people. The Druze leaders were authentic not just because they appealed to
a romantic British notion of highland chiefs—a notion which, according to
Hugh Trevor-Roper, was invoked at roughly the same period44—but be-
cause they served as interlocutors with the East. In their fine homes and as
guests of their gracious hospitality, British writers could confidently ex-
pound on the “realities” of the Druze experience; they could relate the cus-
toms and manners of the Druze race, tribe, or nation and contrast them
with the general state of the Ottoman Empire, which was uncharitably
deemed to be in irrevocable decline. Above all, such descriptions of Mount
Lebanon’s Druze elites typified a strong yearning to remake the local elites
into what they were not: “authentic” sources for a tribal society, highland
chieftains, or, in the words of an American missionary, “patterns of ‘gen-
tlemen’ in manners and courtesy.”45 It was of little consequence to travel-
ers and missionaries that the local elites did not identify themselves as such
and in fact saw themselves as far grander and more illustrious personages
than mere leaders of premodern clans.
Perhaps the foreign missionaries best exemplify the spirit of the gentle
crusade and reflect the intrusive power of nineteenth-century Western
imagination. They provide the clearest example of the will of Europeans
and Americans to shape the land according to their expectations, regardless
of and indeed despite the realities they found on the ground. Jesuit mis-
sionaries in particular had reason for confidence. Theirs was among the
oldest missions to the Orient.46 In 1831, they were invited back by the


[PDF page 44]
26 / The Gentle Crusade
Greek Catholic and Maronite Churches, who had heard “with joy” of the
resurrection of the Company of Jesus.47 And like their predecessors before
the suppression of their order in 1773, they were driven by the exhortation
to join their fellow Christians, who were thought to be suffering griev-
ously in “cruel servitude” to an Islamic despotism.48 Three Jesuits— one
Italian, Paul Riccadonna, one Frenchman, Benoît Planchet, and one Ger-
man doctor, Henri Henze—sallied forth. They were armed with instruc-
tions from their superior general, Jean Roothaan in Rome, to maintain at
all costs their humility and chastity “among a people whose morals may be
licentious.” They were also warned that they must above all maintain their
union: “for those of you who are to be found in a country so distant, sepa-
rated from your brothers, this must be your principal consolation.” What
is more, added Roothaan, they “must be alert so that nobody should be
given the impression that his ignorance, his lack of culture, the harshness
of his manners causes you repugnance.”49
Prepared to encounter the “Orient which was always sympathetic to
France,” the Jesuits embarked on the Will of God. After a rough crossing,
described by Riccadonna as one tormented by the “demons” who had tried
to finish the company at sea by inducing tempests and contrary winds,
they arrived in the harbor of Beirut. From their vessel they could appreci-
ate the splendid beauty of the land, the orchards and groves and palm trees,
and behind the city the dramatic, snow-capped Mt. Sanin. Dressed in Arab
costume, they disembarked. Riccadonna confessed that at once “we were
surrounded by a mass of turbans, by staffs and pistols. . . . I can assure
you,” he added, “that at first we were overcome by a secret shudder [fris-
son].” They walked, eyes to the ground, refusing to notice either the
camels or “all the other new things” that they passed. In their pockets they
had letters of introduction for the European consuls to whom the Jesuits
had been recommended. Suddenly and much to their relief, a native
Catholic identified himself from within the indistinct “crowd of Muslims”
and led them by hand to his house.50
But this encounter provided the Jesuits with little relief, for instead of
finding the Catholics they had expected to find, they were confronted with
a reality for which they were not prepared: the confusing similarity of
Christian to Muslim in manners, dress, and habits. Riccadonna was hard
pressed to recall Roothaan’s instructions not to show disgust, as he re-
strained his instinct to judge and condemn the “Orient.” In the house of
their Christian host, the discomfort of sitting cross-legged on the Dama-
scene carpets and the strength of the pipe tobacco forced the Jesuits to
abandon their efforts at graciousness. The hard floors, their aching legs,


[PDF page 45]
The Gentle Crusade / 27
and the insects that plagued them at night only added to their initial mis-
ery in the land of Christ. The call to prayer—from the mosques of the
city—reminded the Jesuits that they were in “enemy” territory, and the
dogs barking in the narrow city streets only added to their sense of alien-
ation from the “Orient” they had thought was their own. Riccadonna
could not but exclaim in exasperation that the people were “twenty cen-
turies behind European culture.”51
The disjuncture between expectation and experience felt by Riccadonna
went deeper. Not only were the Orientals, including the Christians, differ-
ent, they were physically revolting. Riccadonna complained that their
“guttural language, which one might say befits camels” (and which the Je-
suits still had not learned), grated on their European ears. He noted the
“savage customs and rough and rude manners of the people with whom
one must live.” And he loathed the “perpetual company of an ignorant,
uneducated, heretical people, Muslims, Druzes and infidels” who practiced
no discernible “religion.”52 Riccadonna’s commentary indicated his alien-
ation from a Christian society which he refused to recognize, and, more
important, which he openly wanted to dismantle and destroy. “The Chris-
tians here are so only in name. And now to this are added the Egyptians,
the emissaries of Satan, the liberals, the carbonari, the biblists, the
methodists, the saint-simoniens, sodomites and others, and all have the
liberty to proselytize. Oh Lord! What woe! What horror!” 53 Riccadonna’s
dismay, finally, was not caused by the lack of Christianity in local society.
Precisely the opposite: his horror lay in his realization that it was indeed
there but in a form comprehensible to him only as repellent and corrupt
and in a world allegedly centuries behind that of European culture. It is to
this premodern place, that is to say a society that did not (yet) define itself
on a temporal scale of modernization, that we must now turn.


[PDF page 46]
3 Knowledge and Ignorance
W
hen an Ottoman admiral, Halil Pasha, was ordered to inspect the con-
dition of Mount Lebanon in the turbulent years of the mid-nineteenth
century, he immediately paid a visit to the exiled emir of Mount Lebanon,
Bashir Shihab. According to the memoirs of Bashir’s principal advisor, af-
ter the usual compliments and after the dispensation of coffee, sherbet, and
sweets—signs of prestige that Bashir was loathe to forgo even in the ig-
nominy of exile—the Pasha turned to his host and asked how he had man-
aged to rule Mount Lebanon for so long and what could he tell him about
the nature of the region’s inhabitants. Bashir, after all, had ruled Mount
Lebanon (with a few brief interludes) from 1788 until his fall in 1840.
“Efendim,” replied Bashir, “it is true that I ruled for that long, but every
three or four years [the inhabitants] would rebel, although they never suc-
ceeded. I would kill, hang, imprison and beat without opposition to make
them submit.” As for their nature, Bashir contented himself by relating
the following proverb. “Efendim,” he said at length, “there is a bird in
Mount Lebanon called Abu Far, which hunts mice. He is bigger than a fal-
con and perches on a high tree. When the sun rises, he looks to his shadow
and sees it larger than it actually is and so he tells himself ‘Today, I must
hunt a camel.’ But as the sun rises higher, his shadow grows proportionally
smaller until the sun looms over his head; then Abu Far looks to his
shadow and sees it smaller than it actually is, and so he settles on hunting
mice.”1
At first glance, such wistful admissions by Bashir, who described him-
self as “an old man, melancholy and aged, powerless and stooping to the
level of poverty,” seem incongruous with his standing as the founding fa-
ther of modern Lebanese history.2 The metaphorical and physical worlds
that Bashir inhabited have little in common with twentieth-century
28


[PDF page 47]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 29
Lebanese descriptions of their country’s history and with earlier European
perceptions of a romantic refuge. Contrary to Lamartine’s depiction of a
spiritual haven and contrary to a Lebanese historiography that has con-
structed (indeed is dependent on) a narrative of national tolerance cor-
rupted by sectarianism, violence existed in pre-1860 Ottoman Lebanese
society, but it consisted primarily of elite violence deployed to reaffirm a
rigid, status-based social order defined as the rule of knowledge over igno-
rance. Local communities did not identify themselves tribally or nation-
ally, and they subsumed their religious identities within a political and
public space that accommodated differences of faith.3 Ottoman Lebanese
society was shaped less by centuries of sectarian tolerance (or strife) than
by a social order that, heuristically speaking, cut Mount Lebanon in two.
At the top, an elite community regarded its control over religious and sec-
ular knowledge as essential to a hierarchical ordering of society. This com-
munity included Lebanese notables and those who chronicled their histo-
ries as well as Ottoman government officials and religious leaders. It
existed above, exploited, and defined itself against the second community,
the ahali, or the common Druze and Maronite villagers constituting the
bulk of indigenous society. The aim of this chapter is to sketch the outlines
of social order in this multireligious society and to explore the nature of vi-
olence that regulated this order.
the genealogical geography of mount lebanon
Long before the first missionaries arrived to reform them, Christians had
been living in Mount Lebanon. Maronites settled in Mount Lebanon dur-
ing the tenth and eleventh centuries following persecution by the Byzan-
tines. During the Crusades, the Maronite Church entered into a formal
union with Rome but maintained its autonomy and its Syriac liturgy. Ini-
tially the Maronites settled in the northern reaches of Mount Lebanon, in
Qannubin, which served as the seat of the Maronite patriarchate. Over
time, their monasteries developed from remote refuges, inconspicuously
nestled along the sheer sides of the Lebanese mountains, to splendid struc-
tures.4 By the nineteenth century a considerable Christian population was
spread across Mount Lebanon, including the southern Druze-dominated
regions.5 The Druzes first appeared in the eleventh century and established
themselves in the southern part of Mount Lebanon and various regions of
southwestern Syria.6 In addition to Druzes and Maronites, there were also
significant Greek Orthodox and Catholic as well as Shi‘a communities that
dwelled in and around Mount Lebanon.7 Several parts of Mount Lebanon


[PDF page 48]
30 / Knowledge and Ignorance
were home to a religiously mixed population. Regional accents aside, both
Christian and Druze shared a common culture and a common respect of
agricultural cycles, were bound by the same customs and hierarchies, and
submitted to the same lords. Like all other peoples of the area, the local in-
habitants placed tremendous stock in their religious identities. For the vast
majority of the religiously mixed population, life in Mount Lebanon was a
struggle to reconcile conflicting pulls. Leaders and villagers, priests and
townspeople eked out a precarious existence within a coherent world that
had two cardinal limits: those set by God and those set by the temporal
elites who claimed to rule with God’s mandate.
Mount Lebanon was a region that straddled three Ottoman vilayets
(eyalets), or provinces. To the north of Mount Lebanon was the vilayet of
Tripoli; to its east was the important vilayet of Damascus; to the south was
that of Sayda (Sidon), which was specifically established in 1660 to keep a
firm grip on Mount Lebanon and the surrounding hinterlands. Although
the idea of Lebanon as an independent nation did not exist, the Ottoman
government accepted a certain degree of autonomy for Mount Lebanon.8
Ultimate authority after 1660, however, always rested with the Ottoman
governor of the vilayet of Sayda. Historically, the term Mount Lebanon
(Jabal Lubnan) referred to the mountain range on the western fringes of
the area the Mamelukes had called Bilad al-Sham and that the Ottomans
simply called Suriye, or Syria, in the nineteenth century.9 The southern
part of Mount Lebanon was often referred to in local chronicles as Jabal al-
Duruz (Ott. Cebel-i Düruz or Dürzi Dag˘ı), or the Mountain of the Druze,
or simply as Jabal al-Shuf. The northern part was sometimes described as
Jabal Kisrawan, or the Mountain of Kisrawan. Indeed, only in the begin-
ning of the nineteenth century, under the rule of Bashir Shihab, did the
term Mount Lebanon become widespread (especially among European
travelers), and it was only in the mid-nineteenth century that it was finally
adopted by the Ottoman authorities (as Cebel-i Lübnan) to signify a co-
herent and separate entity.
There was nothing impermeable about Mount Lebanon, although the
physical landscape was crisscrossed by several rivers which formed its nat-
ural boundaries. Trade and economy organically linked Mount Lebanon to
the rest of Syria. Wheat was not produced in Mount Lebanon, and, there-
fore, the major staple had to be imported from other Syrian regions, such
as the Bekaa and the Hawran. Commodities produced in Mount Lebanon,
like silk, were exported primarily to local and regional markets, such as
Damascus.10 Travel was not often undertaken, and those who did travel,
the makaris (or muleteers), were the men who brought a village into con-
tact with other villages and towns on a regular basis. Caravansaries, or


[PDF page 49]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 31
rest stations, were built along the Beirut-Damascus road, which cut across
Mount Lebanon. There were several on the coastal road in Jbayl and in Ju-
niya; there were also some higher up like the one in Mdayrij.11 The cities
that surrounded Mount Lebanon— Tripoli, Beirut, Sayda, Damascus, and
Acre—were walled citadels where the urban confronted the rural.12
The largest towns in Mount Lebanon, such as Dayr al-Qamar, were
small in comparison with the major cities of Syria. Six hours by horseback
from Beirut, Dayr al-Qamar served as an entrepôt for the villages of the
Shuf. It was one of the major artisanal centers of the Mountain. Dayr al-
Qamar clothed the shaykhs of Mount Lebanon. Makers of wool shawls and
silk and cotton textiles, blacksmiths, tailors, soap manufacturers, tanners,
and bakers as well as a silk weighing machine could all be found in Dayr al-
Qamar. Before 1860, according to one of its inhabitants, it boasted of hav-
ing three hundred looms.13 Predominantly Maronite, it also had a sizable
Druze population. Its markets were stocked with goods from Aleppo,
Sidon, and Damascus. Its merchants loaned money to the great landown-
ing families and built large houses, and from its population the emirs of
Mount Lebanon often chose scribes and secretaries, such as Mikhayil
Mishaqa and Rustum Baz.14 Not surprisingly Bashir Shihab built his
palace across the valley from Dayr al-Qamar, in Bayt al-Din. Although
Dayr al-Qamar was called the “city of Lebanon,” its inhabitants were
known to each other. And like other villages in Mount Lebanon, Dayr al-
Qamar was under the control of a notable family, in this case the Druze
Abu Nakad shaykhs. In addition to rivers and ravines, the various elite
families gave each region its overarching identity; they carved out spheres
of influence and autonomously administered districts as muqata‘jis. They
collected taxes, maintained tranquillity, and assured good government over
the ahali. They defined and gave expression to a genealogical geography,
for Mount Lebanon was divided not religiously but according to various
districts inherited by important families.15
Of these, the Shihabs ranked first. Like many of the important families,
the Shihabs were divided into rival households which competed for the
privilege to rule Mount Lebanon. They and two other families, the Chris-
tian Abilam‘s and the Druze Arslans, were the only princely families of
Mount Lebanon.16 The Abilam‘s’ stronghold was the Matn district; the
Arslans dominated the Gharb district. Next in line came those who were
ranked as muqaddams, such as the Shi‘a Hamada family who came from
the Hirmil region and originally ruled large areas of the Kisrawan dis-
trict—although by the nineteenth century they had long since lost their
grip on the Kisrawan, which passed quite firmly into the hands of the
Maronite families.17 Following the muqaddams in prestige were the


[PDF page 50]
Map 3. Old-regime Mount Lebanon.


[PDF page 51]



[PDF page 52]
34 / Knowledge and Ignorance
shaykhly Druze families; of these, the most powerful was the Janbulat
family, which dominated the Shuf, Iqlim al-Tuffah, Iqlim al-Kharrub,
Iqlim Jazzin, and Jabal Rayhan districts. There were also the ‘Imads in the
‘Urqub district, the Abu Nakads in Manasif and part of the Gharb, the Tal-
huqs in the upper Gharb, and the ‘Abd al-Maliks in the Jurd district. The
Maronites also had important families such as the Khazins, who were lords
of Kisrawan with the exception of the village of Ghazir, which was associ-
ated with the Hubayshes. The rise of the Maronite families was intimately
connected to their allegiance to the Shihabs and to their ties with the
Druze families.18
These great families and the host of smaller, less significant, but
nonetheless important families were interdependent; they shared a code of
conduct, distinctive dress, and similar responsibilities and privileges.
Many notables lived in palaces, entertained lavishly, and even traveled.
Myriad differences nuanced their relationships, but between them and the
ahali of Mount Lebanon was a vast chasm, one defined not only by mate-
rial wealth but by social custom. Never was the title that separated the
shaykh from the ahali forgotten, for according to a contemporary chroni-
cler “in this country there is tremendous preservation of the rank of peo-
ple according to custom, which does not disappear in poverty and cannot be
obtained through wealth.”19 Depending on the rank of his visitor, the Shi-
hab emir would stand up immediately, or he would stand up only after his
guest crossed halfway into the room, or he would stand up only after his
guest bowed to salute him, or he would not stand up at all. He would em-
brace only some families, allow his shoulder to be kissed by others, extend
his hand to be kissed by still others, and he would not even allow some,
mostly the commoners, the privilege of seeing, let alone kissing, his
hand.20
The great divide within Lebanese society was further extended by
forms of letter writing. How much of the paper was written on and where
the fold was made reflected the social standing of the writer and the recip-
ient.21 Certain salutations were used with the shaykhly class, others with
the Ottoman governors, and still others with the Sultan or the Grand
Vizier. The notables were often referred to in Ottoman as söz sahibleri,
those who have a say and the “masters of words” in an overwhelmingly il-
literate society.22 Family rank, to be sure, was not to be taken for granted.
Even a cursory reading of the local chronicles reveals the tragedies and tri-
umphs that beset every notable family. The power of the Shihabs, who
came to power with the blessing of the Ottomans in 1697, was consolidated
only after they defeated their ‘Alam al-Din rivals at the battle of ‘Ayn Dara


[PDF page 53]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 35
in 1711—after which it became, according to Mishaqa, “an established
custom in the land of the Druze that no one would raise a weapon against
a Shihabi emir unless he had another emir with him.”23 Even then, the
power of the Shihabs was always heavily dependent on local alliances and
imperial patronage networks. When in 1797 the Nakad shaykhs were dec-
imated, their lands expropriated, and their families scattered, a contempo-
rary chronicler concluded that the “Nakad name was obliterated.”24 The
historical event, the extirpation of the five Nakad shaykhs, was commem-
orated with a cruel play on words: “Vanquished are the Oppressors who are
called the People of Calamities and Misfortune [ahl al-balaya wa al-
nakad].”25 Just as a name could be “obliterated,” a name could, on rare oc-
casion, also be elevated by the Shihab emir after a particular instance of
loyalty. For example, if a Shihab emir addressed a letter “al akh al-‘aziz,”
that automatically entitled the recipient to the rank of shaykh.6 In either
case, for better or worse, title and rank depended ultimately on loyalty to
the hierarchy, and they were bestowed rather than acquired.
Rank rather than religion was the all-important marker of elite status in
rural Mount Lebanon. Family alliances occurred across religious lines, cre-
ating alternate kinships that transcended differences of faith.27 Bashir Shi-
hab addressed his namesake, the Druze Bashir Janbulat, as his “brother.”
Marriage alliances were stricter. Members of the Shihab family, which it-
self was divided into Christian and Sunni branches, could marry only
within their family or from among the Abilam‘ family.28 Mishaqa, writing
long after the collapse of the old regime, noted that “at that time the mem-
bers of the [Shihab] family married amongst themselves and were uncon-
cerned with a difference in religion.”29 It is not surprising, then, that
Christian and Druze notables took an oath of allegiance at the shrine of the
Virgin Mary, that one loyal Shi‘a emir was buried in the Sunni Shihab
family cemetery and that a Christian merchant funded the construction of
a mosque.30 Even the French poet Lamartine acknowledged that Emir
Bashir appeared to be a Druze to the Druzes, a Christian to the Christians,
and a Muslim to the Muslims. At his palace in Bayt al-Din Bashir built
both a mosque and a church.31 The Arabic word used today to denote a re-
ligious sect, ta’ifa, was in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries often
used to denote a family of rank regardless of its religious persuasion.32 The
great families of Mount Lebanon presented themselves as the intermedi-
aries between religious communities.33 They drew their pride and their so-
cial position from a combination of their religious standing and the respect,
tradition, and reciprocity that they enjoyed with other elite families.
Although belonging to a religious community was intertwined with a


[PDF page 54]
36 / Knowledge and Ignorance
number of secular identities (such as family, village, and rank), there was
an undeniable respect for the sacred boundaries of faith. The public, polit-
ical culture of Mount Lebanon functioned through an unspoken recogni-
tion of the temporality of loyalty: no Ottoman governor lived forever and
no ruler could rely on the automatic allegiance of his subordinates but in-
stead had to be constantly alert to shifting alliances. The private cultures of
faith, however, depended on the strict and absolute loyalty of their respec-
tive believers. As members of religious communities, Druzes and Maro-
nites fully accepted each other with the understanding that neither side
would encroach on the other’s sacred territory; they respected, acknowl-
edged, and often participated in the various Christian and Muslim reli-
gious feasts, ceremonies, and customs that marked a living multicommu-
nal society. Even in times of conflict, “it was the custom in the mountain
in times of unrest to place valuables inside houses of worship, where they
would be respected by the victor.”34 I do not meant to paint a picture of
“tolerance” (for that is to emphasize a discourse on sectarianism that was
not yet present) nor to deny the availability of a language of religious dis-
crimination and differentiation. From shari‘a courts, Ottoman decrees, vil-
lage proverbs, and zajaliyyat (poems in the Arabic vernacular) of the Mar-
onite historian and bishop Ibn al-Qila‘i (d. 1516), it is clear that such a
language existed, but it was subordinate to and enmeshed in a range of
competing discourses of obedience, allegiance, and loyalty inherent in local
society. It presented, in other words, no significant barrier to a social order
founded on the shared values and interests of a nonsectarian political elite.
Conversion was a sin, a treachery that far surpassed that of secular be-
trayal, for secular betrayal could be justified and rationalized, even for-
given and forgotten. Conversion marked an absolute break with the past, a
rejection of heritage and history, and a new beginning. Moreover, it indi-
cated an intrusion by others into a private, sacred sphere of life—a theft
that undermined the very basis of social order, which depended on a quies-
cent and theoretically unchanging religiosity. The zeal for conversion to
the “true” faith expressed by foreign missionaries elicited a generally neg-
ative response from local secular and religious authorities as well as from
the Ottoman government. It provoked a singularly hostile reaction from
the Maronite and Greek Orthodox Churches, especially after Catholic mis-
sionaries succeeded in attracting numerous Orthodox converts in eigh-
teenth-century Aleppo, Damascus, and Mount Lebanon and after Ameri-
can missionaries openly proclaimed the “error” of indigenous Christian
belief. Notables, however, by virtue of their power and influence, were able
to defy such strictures. By the nineteenth century, several branches of the


[PDF page 55]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 37
Shihab family had already converted to Christianity. Because of the status
of their family, those branches of the Shihabs which did convert were not
exposed to charges of apostasy; in fact, they continued to intermarry with
other branches of the family.35 Nevertheless, Bashir Shihab, who was born
a Christian, practiced a studied ambivalence, and maintained a public fic-
tion that he was Muslim, swore on the Quran (as well as the Gospel), for
example, and he distributed alms to the Druze poor. Neither he nor his Ot-
toman masters saw a need to emphasize what would, for an ordinary per-
son, have been a flagrant violation of social norms.36
limits of ottoman influence
In 1516 the Ottoman armies invaded Syria, and until the First World War
they ruled the province continuously (with a brief exception between 1831
and 1840). Ottoman control of Mount Lebanon persisted for four cen-
turies, so by the eighteenth century, if not much earlier, Ottoman rule was
a normal and accepted fact of life.
Mount Lebanon’s proximity to Damascus made its stability and pacifi-
cation a perennial Ottoman concern. When a local ruler became too ambi-
tious, as did Fakhr al-Din, or when its elites became too troublesome, the
Ottomans intervened with brutal force to crush what one Ottoman chron-
icler described as the “jerboas and mice.”37 In general, the rural character
of Mount Lebanon, which so appealed to European travelers in the nine-
teenth century, held little fascination for Ottoman officials, who were oc-
casionally called on to pacify the region, and to the Ottoman governors,
who were meant to rule it. The word Druze, or dürzü in Turkish, was
derogatory and meant scoundrel. To those accustomed to urban Ottoman
culture, Mount Lebanon represented an insignificant backwater inhabited
by those whose rough manners merited not the gentle treatment handed
down to civilized peoples but a summary denouncement; one nineteenth-
century Ottoman military commander referred to an “entirely seditious
people, inherently endowed with the most abominable nature and deserv-
ing of reproach.”38
Nevertheless, protected under the rubric of the Ottoman state’s millet
system, whereby the major non-Muslim communities were granted civil
and religious self-government, the inhabitants of Mount Lebanon were
consigned to benign neglect on the fringes of an imperial Ottoman imagi-
nation.39 The autonomy which was granted to them was not absolute;
rather, as the chronicles bear out year after year, the shaykhs and emirs in-
gratiated themselves with the Ottoman governors—through oral or writ-


[PDF page 56]
38 / Knowledge and Ignorance
ten supplications or gifts and rituals of humility such as kissing a gover-
nor’s hands or the hem of his robe. In return, the ruler of Mount Lebanon
annually received the hil‘at, or ceremonial robe of honor, which confirmed
him in his official position as an Ottoman functionary. By and large, how-
ever, Mount Lebanon was left to its own devices; its notables could and did
preserve their pre-Ottoman traditions as long as they were totally obedi-
ent to their Ottoman masters. Abdullah Pasha’s proclamation to Bashir
Shihab in 1829 summed up the essential nature of the relationship. He
conferred legitimacy on Bashir, and, in exchange, he expected discipline,
prosperity, tranquillity, and security of the imperial subjects, as well as the
prompt deliverance of required taxes and all other obligations, the safe-
guarding of roads, and the eradication without forgiveness of all those who
would sow corruption and transcend their hudud, or limits.40 When Bashir,
following a brief spell of disgrace, again won the favor of Abdullah, the Ot-
toman governor reminded Bashir that “we never for a moment removed
you from our good graces; it was you who allowed doubts and anxieties to
enter your mind which distanced you from our service. It is evident that if
a servant won’t serve his master, the master will find another who
will.”41
Metaphors of subordination were an integral part of Ottoman political
discourse. The Sultan was the “shadow of God on earth,” and all his sub-
jects were, metaphorically, his slaves (kullar or ‘abid). Like a Spanish king
who ruled over an empire in the Americas, the Sultan in the Levant was a
paradoxically absent presence.42 Justice was administered with his “com-
passion,” and in the mosques of the land Friday prayers were said in his
name. He granted equity without equality. The notables and the villagers
constantly sparred over the significance of the Sultan’s name: taxes were
levied in his name, and petitions were addressed to his exalted throne. The
Sultan’s name was an icon that all subjects believed in, a symbol they could
all share, and a recourse beyond local authority. It was also the apex of a
secular loyalty that bound all his subjects.
knowledge and power
All subjects knew they must be loyal to the Sultan. Whereas both com-
moners and notables accepted inherited norms that organized political
space and determined the composition of hierarchy—such as the funda-
mental separation between high and low, rich and poor, elite and
nonelite— only members of the community of knowledge, which included
secular notables, their advisors (the mudabbirs), the upper Christian
clergy, and the Druze mashayikh ‘aql, had the power to explain, legiti-


[PDF page 57]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 39
mate, alter, or otherwise mediate such boundaries. Religious and secular
knowledge were deployed in the service of stability and hierarchy. Al-
though personal law and education lay within the purview of each religious
community, the realms of education, law, and politics reinforced one an-
other; each was an element in maintaining the domain of secular obedience
to the Sultan.43
A symbiotic relationship existed between secular and ecclesiastical au-
thorities of Mount Lebanon. The Druze qadis of the shari‘a court in Dayr
al-Qamar, who judged matters as diverse as inheritance, land and property
ownership, and debt, and whose competence was acknowledged by both
Christian and Druze inhabitants of the Shuf, owed their position to the
Shihab ruler.44 The Maronite Khazin shaykhs (one of whom became patri-
arch in 1845) had a complex and long-standing relationship with the Mar-
onite Church. They were intimately involved in the consolidation of Mar-
onite hegemony in Kisrawan; they involved themselves in Church politics,
but they also donated land to the Church and to the monastic orders in
Mount Lebanon, partially to limit the fragmentation of their estates, par-
tially to relieve themselves of financial responsibilities for unprofitable
monasteries traditionally under their patronage, and partially to receive
spiritual blessing.45 For their part, the Druze elites did not view the Maro-
nite Church as a hostile institution, even with the increasing Latinization
and reform of the Church.46 In several cases, Druze notables funded the
development of monasteries and were themselves called on to mediate in
disputes among Christians.47
In turn, the clergy were exempt from military service, were spared the
trauma of having troops quartered in their homes, and were not subject to
corvée labor.48 They were expected, however, to support the secular pow-
ers, to educate the children of the shaykhs, and to rally the villagers when
and if needed behind causes which may not necessarily have concerned the
villagers themselves. The Maronite patriarch often acted to ensure that the
villages under his spiritual authority abided in “peace, tranquility, and re-
pose” and that villagers remained in “the good graces of the emirs.”49 And
if they did not, the patriarch was quick to invoke divine intervention. In the
eighteenth as in the nineteenth century, excommunication was the patri-
arch’s ultimate recourse with recalcitrant villagers.50 Although the eigh-
teenth century had witnessed a revival of Maronite monasticism, secular
clergy could not afford to be aloof from the rigors of daily life.51 The few
boys destined to become village priests were given a parochial education
comprising basic reading and writing skills.52 This was all they needed to
keep simple accounts and to write simple formulaic petitions in a largely il-


[PDF page 58]
40 / Knowledge and Ignorance
literate society. Village priests, who often inherited their position, oversaw
contracts for buying and selling, wills, sharecropping agreements, and doc-
uments outlining the obligations of peasant families to notables.
Just as the clergy played an essential role in legitimating the social or-
der, the chroniclers (many of whom were priests or monks) recorded its
history. They told the story of an interdependent elite culture that tra-
versed and intersected narrower communities of faith. Although these his-
torians were dismissed by the likes of Churchill, who said of them “to dig-
nify this performance with the title of History, would be absurd,”53 it is in
large part due to them that some semblance of the prereform world still re-
mains today. Compared to Churchill’s closed narrative, where development
and forward movement could come only from without, the local narratives
do not conclude, they end. In other words, chronicles such as Emir Haydar
Ahmad al-Shihabi’s Al-Ghurar al-hisan fi akhbar abna’ al-zaman drew on
several different sources and were not constrained within a teleological
narrative of progress.54
The local histories were meant to be added to by later generations. Per-
haps most illustrative in this respect is the manuscript left behind by
Hananiyya al-Munayyar, a Greek Catholic monk of the monastery of Mar
Yuhanna in Khinshara. His early nineteenth-century chronicle was ur-
gently set to paper to capture the oral histories he had inherited because “it
has been proved that what is not recorded does not endure in the memory.”
He wrote that he had tried to be faithful to the truth but did not know
when his “appointment with death” would arrive, so “I desire that who-
ever reads my book to correct its mistakes, and to he who completes it af-
ter me, full recompense and credit [from God].”55 Some of the chronicles
such as Istifan Duwayhi’s Tarikh al-azmina, span centuries and some, such
as Munayyar’s, span little over a century, from 1697 to 1807. The chroni-
cler never entirely succeeded in removing himself from the history he re-
flected. Unlike Henri Guys, the former French consul whose history of
Mount Lebanon flows from the “superiority of a European who observes
from the heights of Christian civilization,” the local chroniclers were more
attuned to the rhythms of a dynamic society.56
Above all, the scope of the chronicles is impressive. Although they were
concerned principally with Mount Lebanon, the chroniclers understood
that its history was incomprehensible, literally unrecordable, without con-
stant reference to the other provinces of Ottoman Syria. The history of
Mount Lebanon as a separate “refuge” from the world of Islam was not
recorded because it was not conceived of as such. Although all the chroni-


[PDF page 59]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 41
clers mentioned were Christians, they registered no concern over the im-
minent threat to their religion supposedly posed by Muslims—a threat
that consumed the missionaries.57 If anything, it was the arrival of mis-
sionaries that sparked an indigenous concern for the preservation of Chris-
tian faith, for it was the missionaries, and not the Ottomans, who refused
to accept the legitimacy of traditional Christian practice. To writers like
Haydar Ahmad, such terms as decline were as foreign as “the English
princes [who] would travel in Arabistan and observe these countries and
record what they saw.”58 And while these writers certainly made note of
different villages, regions, religions, and cities, the cultural and geographic
integrity and the interconnectedness of the Ottoman world was never for
a moment denied.
The chroniclers reflected the imperial Ottoman discourse that equated
good government with stability and loyalty with order. Far from lacking
interpretation, as has commonly been asserted, their pages were animated
by the divisions of local society—if one can imagine the different groups
of people who carried out the orders of the governors, collected the taxes,
created bonfires to ward off locusts, and hailed returning shaykhs from
long or short exiles, all literally allowing the passage of society from year
to year. The chroniclers described a world in which social rank was not
only a natural fact but an inviolate reflection of the will of God. They took
a dim view of popular mobilizations, including the French Revolution,
which Haydar Ahmad described as having thrown open the “doors of hell”
and allowed the “Lord of Darkness” to emerge.59 They feared the break-
down of social order and submerged the history of the commoners in a
narrative of the elites.60
Recorded history was confined to the elites. When they were mentioned
in the chronicles, commoners were represented collectively. I do not mean
simply that their individual, everyday lives were largely outside of
recorded history but that their episodic entry into politics (always framed
as an instigation of feuding elites) was a trope deployed by chroniclers to
embellish a particular plot or narrative. They were inserted and removed
from history at certain predictable moments; they rebelled and they sub-
mitted, but they were not the subject of history. What brought history
alive to the chroniclers were the elements of duplicity and surprise that
dotted the narrative of elite politics, what Pierre Bourdieu refers to as “the
room for strategies” that made known rituals unpredictable.61 When a rit-
ual (of hospitality, for example) had the possibility of going awry, when an
Ottoman governor whose displeasure had been incurred invited a notable


[PDF page 60]
42 / Knowledge and Ignorance
to share with him the boat ride to Acre, when a Shihab emir invited a dis-
affected rival to his home—these were the moments when the unpre-
dictable unfolded and when terror occurred.62
the domain of obedience
The “domain of obedience” invoked by the Ottoman government encom-
passed politics and religion, public and private—all that contributed to a
stable and tranquil social order. This metaphorical domain was grounded
in the material world of Mount Lebanon and structured around the local
inhabitants’ attachment to the land, an attachment nourished by a high
population density and a scarcity of arable land. “Elsewhere man has culti-
vated the land,” wrote David Urquhart, “in Lebanon he has made it.”63
Contrary to the letter of Ottoman law, which stipulated that all land was
the property of the Sultan, parcels of land were openly bought and sold in
Mount Lebanon.64 The established families and the Maronite Church
owned the largest tracts of land. Taking advantage of the growth of the
Christian population in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the Jan-
bulats along with several other Druze families encouraged Christian fami-
lies to migrate south to work their lands, usually on a sharecropping ba-
sis.65 They also donated land to Christians to erect churches, and by the
nineteenth century the Christian population in the southern districts of
Mount Lebanon was considerable. Although most of the land remained in
the hands of a few Druze families, in several villages and a few towns such
as Dayr al-Qamar the Christians predominated, and in them Christians
owned houses, livestock, flour mills, soap factories, silk looms, and, of
course, whatever agricultural produce they managed to grow.66 In
Kisrawan, the Maronite Khazins had established pious endowments in the
eighteenth century to consolidate their power and to protect their property
from confiscation (particularly in the absence of male heirs), a develop-
ment which had both expanded lands under cultivation and promoted per-
manent Maronite settlement. By the nineteenth century, therefore, land in
Kisrawan was controlled largely by various households of the Khazin fam-
ily— each of which further subdivided its inheritance—as well as by the
Maronite monasteries.67 For many villagers, however, the only long-term
security lay in the service of one or another of the notable families.
Caught between Ottoman imperial will, irade-i senniye, and their local
elites, the villagers of Mount Lebanon grappled with complex and compet-
ing forces and pulls that severely tested the dynamic and interlocking affil-
iations and loyalties that were grounded in material concerns—in the


[PDF page 61]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 43
mulberry tree, the olive orchard, and the silkworm. The men and women
who were born into this society—the ahali of a village— opened their
eyes to their village and for the most part lived their lives in close proxim-
ity to it. The lot of the “labouring classes,” as one consul described the ma-
jority of Mount Lebanon’s population, was to produce and to do so with
diligence.68 The villagers centered their lives around various crops and
trees. Seasons were described by the produce they brought in their wake,
and the all-important mulberry tree’s yield made the difference between
prosperity and penury. Women unwound and reeled raw silk and partici-
pated in battles. Together with the men of the village they struggled to pay
a number of taxes, the largest of which was the basic Ottoman land tax
known as the miri, which amounted to 10 percent of the produce of the cul-
tivated land.69 Depending on the region, villagers had numerous other ob-
ligations: in Kisrawan, they presented their shaykhs with a quantity of
soap, coffee, honey, or tobacco at Easter or on the occasion of the marriages
of the shaykhs’ daughters, sons, or sisters. Villagers could not marry with-
out the permission of their lord, and it would have been unheard of to have
a celebration or feast without inviting the clergy.70 Certain plots of land
that the shaykh owned were set aside and not taxed. The produce of this
land defrayed the costs of hospitality, but it was the peasants who had to
work the land collectively, usually on a Sunday after the local clergymen
had exhorted them to do God’s bidding.71
Nonpayment of taxes, default on repayments of loans, or any other se-
rious infraction brought a particularly onerous punishment. Men-at-arms
were billeted in the homes of the ahali, reminding them of the power of
Bashir Shihab and depleting them of scant resources. For a peasant to think
of taking refuge in a church or monastery was improbable; in fact, monas-
teries in many cases acted as intermediaries between creditor and debtor,
often collecting the debt itself. While the Maronite clergy could and did of-
fer sanctuary to many a refugee, those who were escaping creditors were
expressly forbidden by the Lebanese Council in 1736 to be offered refuge
under pain of excommunication.72 Even when the Maronite Church sanc-
tioned days off to celebrate a local patron saint, it issued strict warnings
that a village could take only one day off for a saint’s holiday a year, and the
rest of the saints’ holidays were to be observed with simple tokens of re-
spect. It was up to the bishops (and their subordinates) to make sure that
residents of one village did not join the celebrations of another village in
order to avoid work.73
Hospitality reproduced and reflected the social divisions of Mount
Lebanon. From the bounty of his inherited land the shaykh could afford to


[PDF page 62]
44 / Knowledge and Ignorance
entertain the guests who passed through his domain. Rituals of hospitality
were crucial to the conduct of politics, to the reputation of notables, and
hence to the maintenance of public order and obedience.74 Hospitality was
an expression of power and affluence and covered, as Urquhart astutely
noted, “a multitude of sins.”75 Foreigners, including missionaries, were
quick to appreciate this aspect of sociability in a land where beds and sil-
verware were unknown. Guests of the notables were presented with hot
embroidered silk and gold towelettes perfumed with rose water to wash
their hands and face, after which they were offered pipes, sherbet, and cof-
fee.76 Ordinary villagers, whose own simple diet consisted of bread, olives,
lentils, bulgur, and kishk (a fermented mixture of bulgur and yogurt), were
not allowed to offer coffee to their guests but had to be content with giving
it to the shaykh, who monopolized its dispensation.77
Village solidarity mediated the division between elites and nonelites.
The village square was an arena of sociability. If the village were Christian,
or even mixed, a church would often be located near or on the square; the
tolling of its bells was a collective summoning, a warning, a notice of sad-
ness or happiness. In the church also would be kept the standard of the vil-
lage, to be unfurled as was Dayr al-Qamar’s in times of war.78 And, of
course, in the square the different village hierarchies—the priest, the lord,
the cultivator, and the artisan—interacted on an everyday basis. It was a
small world, in which the surrounding villages were the outer edges of the
familiar. War and peace and life and death were village concerns. A villager
signed petitions and fought battles on behalf of the village. When called on
to furnish a contingent of men for war, the village elders decided who
would go as part of the village unit.79 Villagers also shared the “dead”
(mawat) land in the areas surrounding the village, which was uncultivated
and left for the common good.80 The poor could forage in this area, which
served as a common pasture. The springs and other natural resources were
left for all to use.
A discourse of loyalty also mediated the social order. As one chronicler
put it, “It is the custom among clansmen to distinguish followers not with
regard to sect, but with regard to allegiance and loyalty.”81 The ahali car-
ried on their humble existence expecting that their shaykh would protect
and defend them.82 The shaykh was a man who in theory put the village
first and in return he was put at the head of the village. He was a secular
patriarch; ideally, he thought and acted for the village, and he controlled,
inspired, and disciplined its young men, or shabab. In the hard times of the
locust plagues, he was expected to gather the village men and lead the ex-


[PDF page 63]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 45
pedition to repulse the invasions.83 And in good times he was expected to
preside over the community, to lead village processions, and to bear on his
shoulders the mantle of village honor. Sa‘id Janbulat, the paramount
Druze shaykh of the mid-nineteenth century, presided over daily gather-
ings of men who came to his home to eat meat, rice, stuffed vegetables,
sweets, and seasonal fruits and to pay homage. The shaykh’s power derived
from the hospitality and generosity given to his retinue, and in return he
expected service.84
ignorance and punishment
Nowhere did the hierarchy of traditional social order express itself more
graphically than in punishment. The notion of political betrayal and
treachery was contingent on a notion of secular loyalty. According to the
chronicler Haydar Ahmad, commoners “betrayed” a Shihab emir when his
extraordinary levies compelled them to revolt in 1790.85 Christians and
Druzes were punished in the same manner; commoners and notables were
not. Only Bashir Shihab authorized capital punishment for the common-
ers; only Ottoman governors authorized the outright murder of elites. No-
tables were executed by strangulation, while commoners were hanged.86
Because local custom frowned on the killing of notables by other notables,
Bashir Shihab often disposed of rivals by cutting out their tongues or, if
they were from his own family, by gouging out their eyes. Since a notable
was the face and voice of respectable society (awjuh al-bilad in Arabic; söz
sahibleri in Ottoman), mutilation, especially blinding and muting, ren-
dered a notable unfit to govern.87
One of the great sins that a notable could commit was “corrupting” (if-
sad) the social order by instigating the common folk to abandon the “do-
main of obedience”— either by inciting commoners to enter into the elite
space of politics or, conversely, by denying them their tranquillity, which
might force them into rebellion. An accusation often made by notables
against one another, in letters to Ottoman governors or to prospective al-
lies, was that their rivals were “stoking the passion” of the commoners and
“seducing” them into rebellion.88 According to the chroniclers, the willful
act was not the commoners’ disobedience, which was emotive rather than
rational, but the deliberate upsetting of the natural order by otherwise sen-
sible elites for their own political advantage.89 Hence the measures elites
took to placate the commoners were often described as being taken “to ex-
tinguish the fire of their fury.” This form of elite prose—what Ranajit


[PDF page 64]
46 / Knowledge and Ignorance
Guha famously described as the “prose of counter-insurgency”—was
haunted by the potential violation of the boundary that separated the com-
munities of knowledge and ignorance.
The violence of the Ottoman state in the Lebanese periphery may be
understood as ritualized, episodic purifications of a corrupted public order
that normally depended on an accommodation of religious difference.
When the Druze leader Bashir Janbulat rebelled against the authority of
Abdullah Pasha in 1824, he was executed on the grounds that he was a
“heretic.” His allegedly “abominable crimes” had “polluted the earth,” for
he had forsaken a compact of notability through “sedition” and had insti-
gated “disorder” and popular unrest. Thus a man who was normally up-
held as one of the söz sahibleri, or “masters of words,” was expelled from
the society of Ottoman civility, branded a “heretic rebel,” and strangled,
and his body was exhibited as an example of the absolute power of the Sul-
tan.90
Such punishment was not only a warning to other notables who strayed
from the domain of obedience but also an indication of the contingent na-
ture of public religious identity. Designations of heresy or infidelity were
assigned and revoked rather than permanently affixed. They were tactical
devices and not absolute expressions of religious hostility. For example, it
was only when Bashir Shihab sided with Mehmed Ali during Mehmed
Ali’s invasion of Syria in 1831 that Bashir was accused by Abdullah of be-
ing a “hain gavur”—a treacherous and ungrateful infidel—who was “per-
forming his gavurlikeness [gavurlug˘unu icra etmekte oldug˘una].”91 Just a
few decades earlier, when Bashir was threatened by his rivals, Abdullah’s
predecessor, the legendary Cezzar Pasha, had warned Bashir’s rivals (and
their followers) in Mount Lebanon to be “informed” that those who per-
sisted in forsaking “truth” in their opposition to Bashir risked annihila-
tion. “O ye who believe!” he wrote, quoting a verse from the Quran,
“Obey Allah, and obey the messenger and those who are in authority.”92
The buyrultu (an official Ottoman decree or mandate) continued, “Submit
and you will be saved; and if you are obstinate you will regret. . . . If you
are ahl al sunna and the community, then enter into the domain of obedi-
ence, for the hand of Allah is with the community, and if you refuse, you
will face the most malicious of conditions and misfortune.”93
Islamic metaphors were deployed in Ottoman political practice not to
impose an Islamic despotism over persecuted minorities (as Lamartine and
Orientalist historiography have insisted) but rather to reinforce an al-
legedly inviolable social hierarchy. In other words, it was mostly when the
social hierarchy was “corrupted” that markers of difference, especially re-


[PDF page 65]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 47
ligious difference, were highlighted. It was only at particular historical mo-
ments that the realities of Ottoman power—the accommodation of theory
to practice, of Islamic Ottoman discourse to a diverse and multireligious
empire—were elided momentarily to produce a necessary (at least in the
eyes of officials like Abdullah Pasha) Islamic despotism to save the empire
from the corruption of insidious heretics and infidels. But this despotism,
assumed by Lamartine to be unchanging, did not persist. Rather, it was al-
ways reconfigured as the theoretical “anomaly” that was everyday Ot-
toman politics—the perfectly routine and reciprocal, if hierarchical, inter-
course between urban Ottoman governors on the one hand and rural
Druze chieftains and Maronite emirs on the other.
Ordinary villagers who rebelled were condemned in an altogether dif-
ferent manner. Their sin, according to the community of knowledge, origi-
nated in ignorance rather than in conscious heresy. The chronicles, which
were expressions of the social order, consistently used the terms ‘umum,
‘amma, a‘wam (Ott. halk) to distinguish the “commoner” ahali from the
notable awjuh and a‘yan (Ott. söz sahibleri). Because order and Ottoman
government were necessarily “just,” anything that tended to disrupt public
order, with its built-in restrictions and hierarchies, was immediately inter-
preted as the work of mischief-makers who had stoked the passions of the
ignorant and unwise common folk. For instance, when both Muslim and
Christian villagers rebelled against Bashir Shihab’s onerous levies in 1821,
Bashir and the Druze notables hunted down the “rebels.” The chronicler
Haydar Ahmad (who was a cousin of Bashir’s) describes how the exhausted
commoners threw themselves at the feet of their master and begged for for-
giveness, “acknowledging their errors, admitting their guilt and their juhl
[ignorance] and the baseness and inferiority of their minds.”94
For his part, the Ottoman governor Abdullah Pasha was no less explicit
in framing the rebellion as a lack of perceptivity on the part of the com-
moners. His decree of 15 September 1821 was addressed to the ahali of
Kisrawan and Bilad Jbayl, to both dhimmis (Christians) and to the
Hamadiyya (the Shi‘a), who were commanded to listen:
We announce to you that we have heard that a few seditious and evil
people have removed from their heads the necklaces of obedience and
have tried to instigate the imperial subjects and to disturb their peace
and discomfort them through their intrigues, cunning and deception
which has only resulted in triviality and the stoking of our anger. And of
the things that happened is that some of you rebelled and put yourselves
at odds with the pride of the emirs, the authority of great men, our child
the venerable Bashir Shihab, may his glory increase. You claimed that


[PDF page 66]
48 / Knowledge and Ignorance
you would not pay more than one miri, and you united and [appeared to
be] turned away from evil; so our child was coming to you, bringing you
order and security and tending to your affairs, and yet you twice met
him with evil in Lahfad and on the coast of Jbayl. And despite the fact
that your rebellious and deviant actions gave you no satisfaction for you
failed, you till now remain stubborn, and till now wield the rod of rebel-
lion, a state of affairs which perplexes us. Such boldness has never before
occurred from any of the imperial subjects, for you well know that you
are weak people, unable to withstand power and battle. You also know
that there is no way for you except through mercy and compassion.
With God’s help, we are always capable of suppressing you, of driving
you away, and forcing you back into the domain of obedience after we
have disciplined those who have to be punished, for this situation cannot
be forgiven or passed over in silence by us because it is well-known that
we hold [Bashir] in our good graces, and that we have put the Mountain
and Bilad Jbayl and its districts under his control . . . and that he is au-
thorized by us to collect the miri without delay and without a piaster less
than is customarily levied. . . . How, then, did it enter your base minds to
suggest such a null and void claim? How, then, did you try to rebel?
How, then, did you assemble as if you were an army ready fo battle? You
who are easier [to crush] than the spider’s web.
We should have met your actions by giving the orders to crush you,
to suppress you, to discipline and punish you so that you would become
a lesson to those who need a lesson. But because you are our subjects, we
decided to show mercy and compassion towards you to advise you to
abandon these seditions. You should all appreciate the drastic conse-
quences of your actions which you are going to regret. All of you know
that you are the subjects held in compassion and protection, and thus
you should return to your villages and preoccupy yourselves with your
own affairs and render what is required of you. Your notables should all
go to [Bashir] and proclaim their obedience to him so that they can
95
jointly endeavor to render the miri that is required of you.
Abdullah’s incredulousness was rooted in his conviction that, ordinarily,
imperial subjects were apolitical, passive, and quiescent. The buyrultu it-
self was a prescription for normalcy. To the extent that commoners were
meant to “know” anything, they were expected to recognize that their
weakness was easier to crush than “the spider’s web” and that their salva-
tion would come only through the “mercy and compassion” of the elites.
Their insubordination was therefore a consequence of their seditious ac-
tions rather than their seditious minds. What the ahali did not know, how-
ever, was how to actively conspire, and that was why the buyrultu made a
very clear distinction between the conspiratorial and corrupting arbab al-
fasad and the ultimately pure yet gullible reaya (imperial subjects).


[PDF page 67]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 49
By this distancing process, the rebels, who clearly rose up because of ex-
cessive taxation, were rendered childlike, incapable of distinguishing good
from evil and powerless to resist temptations that the devil and the arbab
al-fasad—the instigators of corruption and sedition—placed before them.
The rebels had strayed from the patriarchal system or the domain of obe-
dience that extended from the Sultan downward to all his subjects—hence
the reference to Bashir Shihab as “our child,” who in turn was a lord over
the commoners. By rebelling, the commoners had placed themselves in the
domain of insubordination; they had exceeded their boundaries. Being
Christians and Shi‘a, they were doubly audacious (hence the double mean-
ing of the Islamic discourse regarding dhimmis as weak men who do not
fight but also as weak commoners vanquished in the field of battle) for not
only had they exceeded the temporal limits set by the Sultan, their master,
they had also violated the commandments of God. A classical Sunni Is-
lamic discourse was entirely sublimated within a nonsectarian hierarchical
discourse. The point here was not to castigate Christians or Shi‘a generally
but to denounce the boldness of the commoners whose popular movement
had threatened to break the social order and to corrupt the ordered civility
of public space.
The need for a show of force to purify the notability from the incursion
of commoners and to reaffirm the public order was a hallmark of the social
hierarchy that dominated Mount Lebanon throughout Bashir’s reign. The
reaction against popular mobilization also underscored the relations of vi-
olence that underlay a system in which the various inbuilt restraints, the
compassion of rulers, the discourse of Islamic toleration of dhimmis, the
paternalism of the shaykhs, and of course the absent presence of the Sultan
himself ultimately shored up a social order that separated knowledge from
ignorance.
time and empire
Crucial to the operation of Ottoman political culture was the notion of
nonlinear time. Every punishment implicitly carried within in it a provi-
sion for pardon; every exile was mitigated by the knowledge that return
and clemency were imminent. The Nakad name was obliterated only to be
eventually rehabilitated. The “heretic” Bashir Janbulat was executed, but
his son took his place as an “esteemed” face of society. It was recognized by
notable and commoner alike that every present situation might eventually
give way to a reclaimable past. The exact nature of this reversion depended
on circumstances, especially on the strategies deployed by those seeking


[PDF page 68]
50 / Knowledge and Ignorance
pardon and by those who had the power to grant it.96 In tandem with agri-
cultural seasons and annual pilgrimages, politics had a cyclical element.
The granting of clemency (aman) immediately returned things to what
they had been; the phrase sometimes used to describe the forgiveness of a
ruler was that he had “cleared and purified his mind.” Outcasts prostrated
themselves before authority, revitalizing hierarchy, which reciprocally
erased the memory of transgression and pollution. Time paradoxically
flowed in two directions. Sultans died, years passed, subjects rebelled but
could always return to the domain of obedience. The past was not irrevo-
cable. Like the House of Osman, which protected it, social order was as-
sumed to be eternal and unchanging in a world that recognizably
changed.97
As long as European power remained marginal, such paradoxes of Ot-
toman rule persisted. Until the age of reform, the provincial capitals con-
tinued to issue decrees that gave standard formulas for praying for the Sul-
tan’s health and were suffused with the knowledge that the House of
Osman would continue to rule “’til the end of time.”98 Sooner than any-
one could have expected, that “end of time” drew near. Seemingly invinci-
ble and immortal, the Ottoman Empire plunged itself into an era of rapid
transition and, more to the point, an era of European time and European
discourses of progress and modernization. Bashir Shihab’s metaphor about
Abu Far—the bird of prey which could not comprehend its own limits—
represented, as we shall see, local society and the Ottoman Empire as they
together confronted the possibilities of nineteenth-century change. Sectar-
ianism marked a turning point in local history. It signified a culmination of
sovereign Ottoman time and marked the construction of a new metaphor-
ical universe, a new political stage, that transformed the old regime.


[PDF page 69]
4 The Faces of Reform
T
he old regime collapsed with the dawn of the modern age. The rebellious
Ottoman vassal and so-called founder of modern Egypt, Mehmed Ali,
launched an invasion of Syria and Mount Lebanon in 1831 led by his son
Ibrahim Pasha. His rule, which lasted until 1840, precipitated a series of
upheavals that culminated in a Druze and Maronite revolt against the
Egyptian occupation in 1840. It also led directly to the Tanzimat, the
wholesale modernization of the Ottoman army, administration, and soci-
ety along European lines, as well as to the establishment of the European
powers as permanent fixtures in the internal Ottoman political landscape.
Taking advantage of the Lebanese revolt against the Egyptians, Britain and
the Ottomans issued an ultimatum to Mehmed Ali to withdraw from Syria
in 1840. He refused, and by mid-October a joint British-Ottoman-Aus-
trian force had soundly defeated his army and restored Syria to Ottoman
sovereignty. In the wake of the restoration, the Shihab dynasty collapsed,
and sectarian clashes broke out in 1841 in Mount Lebanon between Druze
notables, who were returning from an exile imposed by the Egyptians, and
Maronite villagers of Dayr al-Qamar. The conflict was, at heart, one of op-
posing interpretations of the restoration and contradictory invocations of
rights and responsibilities in the post-Tanzimat era. This violence of 1841
ushered in the age of sectarianism.
Historians have long stressed the break with the past represented by the
Egyptian occupation and the Tanzimat. They have correctly understood
the period between 1831 and 1840 as the advent of modernization in the
Middle East in the sense that all the major participants in the Eastern
Question—Mehmed Ali, the reforming Ottomans, and the Europeans—
conceived of themselves as the embodiments of a new age. More often than
not, however, historians have glossed over the implications of this mod-
51


[PDF page 70]
52 / The Faces of Reform
ernization by depicting the changes during this era as the imposition (by
the Egyptians, the reforming Ottomans, and the Europeans) of a fully
formed and independently standing modernity on a passive and traditional
local society. They have understood sectarianism as an upswelling of pri-
mordial religious solidarities provoked by the modernizing policies of the
Egyptian occupation and by the Tanzimat.1 This perspective of reform and
reaction fails to recognize that sectarianism was a new development that
arose from the political and cultural turmoil of the period 1839 –1840 and
was not a traditional reaction to efforts at reform.2 Sectarianism was no
conflagration waiting to happen; rather it was actively produced. The cu-
mulative impact of the Egyptian invasion, the fall of the Shihabs, the in-
troduction of the Tanzimat, and the interventions of European powers con-
tributed to an environment that metaphorically and physically opened
Mount Lebanon to the possibilities of a new political order based on reli-
gious differentiation.
This chapter explores the erosion of the prereform, nonsectarian poli-
tics of notability and the development of what I call restoration politics, in
which rival local elites deployed the language of legitimacy and tradition in
an effort to outmaneuver one another following the fall of Bashir Shihab
and the reimposition of Ottoman rule in 1840. In the process and in the
context of competing interpretations of the Tanzimat, the presence of Eu-
ropean agents, and the political involvement of the Maronite Church, the
open-ended struggle unleashed over the relationship between religion and
politics inadvertently opened the domain of politics to nonelites.3
”to uplif t the name of egypt ”
Mehmed Ali’s conquest of Syria in 1831 and destruction of several Ot-
toman armies was undoubtedly an exhibition of the modern power that
had “colonized” Egypt.4 In Syria as in the Sudan, the Egyptian efforts to
conscript the population and to extract raw materials proceeded apace.5 At
the outset of his occupation, Ibrahim Pasha made gestures toward the ur-
ban Christian population. He abolished certain distinctions that had vexed
Christian pilgrims and also paid European consuls far more attention than
they ever had received under Ottoman rule. He attempted to reduce finan-
cial corruption, pacified urban Syria, and, despite his own reservations,
reaffirmed Bashir Shihab in his rule over Mount Lebanon.6 Indirect Ot-
toman rule was replaced by a far more coercive and centralized Egyptian
regime. Some of the Lebanese elites, such as the Druze Janbulats and the
Nakads, choose to remain loyal to the Ottomans and, in consequence, were


[PDF page 71]
The Faces of Reform / 53
banished following the Egyptian victories at Acre and Konya.7 Several of
the Nakad shaykhs eventually returned and submitted to Bashir; however,
Shaykh Hammud and Shaykh Nasif preferred exile.8 Bashir, for his part,
quickly bowed down before the Egyptians and assured them that Mount
Lebanon was loyal to the cause of Egypt. He urgently wrote to the notables
of the region telling them to quickly fall in line lest Ibrahim Pasha carry
out his threat to come in person to “extirpate you so that none of you shall
remain after he destroys the circle of sedition.”9 By 1833, Mount Lebanon
was pacified, and Bashir was a contented master of a gilded cage.
Ibrahim Pasha ruled Syria with a standing army and was committed to
maintaining a strict social hierarchy that owed more to Ottoman order
than has been admitted. As in the period of Ottoman rule, the absolute
submission of Syria’s inhabitants was rewarded with paternalistic concern.
But now, submission was not to a distant sultan but to a general in their
midst.10 Commands were to be obeyed without question, without consul-
tation, and without regard for the local population. “Woe to you,” warned
Ibrahim, “who disobeys me or who delays in doing my bidding.”11 The re-
forms of Ibrahim in Syria were all ultimately aimed at redirecting the trib-
ute of Syria from Istanbul to Cairo, albeit in a more ruthless and efficient
manner. Ibrahim’s regime mercilessly conscripted Druzes, Muslims, and
ultimately Christians; it despised the “children of Arabs” [evlad-ı Arab]
and treated the Syrians as if they were “the fellahin of Egypt.”12 Often, the
local notables actively cooperated with the military authorities in the se-
lection and rounding up of the ahali; the result, in the words of one report
by the authorities, was that the population was made to submit “some-
times through deception and sometimes though outright threats and in-
timidation.”13 While sanitation was improved, roads were secured, and
various factions were disciplined by the presence of a standing army, the
policies of taxation, conscription, disarmament, deforestation, and corvée
labor in mines exposed Ibrahim Pasha to revolts in Palestine, Syria, and
Mount Lebanon that began in 1834 and continued until the collapse of the
Egyptian regime in 1840.
The business of suppressing conscription revolts was nothing new to
Ibrahim’s veteran army. One of the most pervasive fears of the Egyptian
authorities was not of the Ottoman armies, which Ibrahim was convinced
he could crush, but of popular discontent and the possible unity of various
groups who could make common cause against Egyptian occupation.14 To
avoid this possibility, the occupation authorities carefully and deliberately
weighed the consequences of arming and disarming certain groups—for
example, using the Lebanese mountaineers to quell rebellions in Palestine


[PDF page 72]
54 / The Faces of Reform
and drafting Christians to fight Druzes. Ibrahim refused to interpret the
rebellions against conscription as anything but rebellions against the state
itself. One was either loyal and submitted unconditionally, or one was a
rebel; there was no middle ground. The Druze of the Hawran balked at
conscription and rebelled in the name of the Sultan in 1837 and 1838.
Some Druze shaykhs were humiliated and others captured and tortured by
the Egyptian authorities until they “confessed” to their part in promoting
“sedition.”15 An overconfident Egyptian officer corps ordered troops to
march on the insurgents. They miscalculated, however; an ill-fated en-
counter with the Druze rebels in the rocky Laja region in 1838 ended in the
rout of several Egyptian divisions.
Ibrahim Pasha was furious at the losses incurred by his army. His reac-
tion to the news of defeat and his grim determination to eradicate the
rebels were no different from the reactions of any Ottoman governor who
had ever faced a rural rebellion. Beneath all the pomp and circumstance of
his modern army, his language, descriptions, and outlook were those of a
military commander frustrated by his inability to use his superior tech-
nology to subdue what he took to be an uncivilized people. The Druzes had
dared challenge the might of the region’s most powerful regime. Alone
they were to face the consequences as Ibrahim devoted himself to planning
the extirpation of what one of his subordinates described as “a race that
cannot be trusted and have no [moral] foundations whatsoever.”16 To his
father Ibrahim admitted that the army had underestimated its task. The of-
ficers had assumed they were dealing with the “commotion of fellahin.”
Yet, “just as I ask God to [bless you], I pray that he may extend my life a
little longer because I consider myself necessary to uplift the name of
Egypt and to elevate its standing and to eradicate the example of these
rebels, which ranks as one of the most difficult problems.”17 Mehmed Ali,
however, was worried that if the Druzes were not quickly suppressed, the
Ottomans might contemplate actively intervening in Syria. He urged
Ibrahim to consider the possibility of using Maronite mountaineers
against the Druzes.18
After reinforcements arrived and with the collaboration of the Shihab
emirs and Christian villagers, Ibrahim hunted down the Druze rebels, first
in the Hasbayya region and then in the Laja. Ibrahim sent the following or-
ders to his officers:
You must do all that is necessary, trust in God, and march on the rebels
to make an example of them and to exterminate them. If the rebels take
refuge in the villages, you must open fire with the artillery until you


[PDF page 73]
The Faces of Reform / 55
have no [ammunition] left; if you [see that] the task has not been ac-
complished, then march on them with the soldiers; do not slacken in
your efforts to put down the rebellion and to punish the rebels; kill men
and women; overlook whatever the soldiers do in this cause, and destroy
19
[the rebels] as thoroughly as possible. In short, do what must be done.
A few days later word was received from the “victorious” army that the
“orders to execute the traitorous rebels” had been carried out. Faceless and
nameless, the “heretics” had been subdued in Hasbayya. Only the Laja
problem remained, and that too was soon resolved. Ibrahim Pasha in-
formed Bashir that “the sword is more trustworthy and prophetic than
books.”20 The rebellion had finally been put down. The leaders of the
rebels threw themselves before the mercy Ibrahim Pasha, begging for
aman. With the “heretics” at his feet, Ibrahim decided to accept the total
submission of the Druzes, while his loyal Shihab allies resolutely looked
on.21
to abolish the past
The Egyptian policy of arming Christian villagers and sending them to
suppress the Druzes has been interpreted by most historians as a turning
point in Druze-Maronite relationships.22 Certainly the policies of divide
and rule determinedly pursued by Ibrahim Pasha were a factor in the later
development of Druze-Maronite antagonism. But several qualifications
are in order. Ibrahim Pasha did not seek to disrupt the social order, nor did
the Christians fight the Druzes out of religious zeal. The significance of
distributing weapons to the Christians lies elsewhere, for in their arming
and disarming Ibrahim Pasha revealed his fundamental commitment to a
traditional Ottoman social order.
The Druze insurrection against Ibrahim was justified primarily in
terms of loyalty to the Sultan. According to French consular reports, the
Druze rebels did not harm Christian villagers in any way, leaving them
free to either join the rebellion or remain neutral.23 Nevertheless, because
of the Hawran rebellion, Bashir Shihab fired the Druzes working as his
servants and guards at Bayt al-Din.24 Bashir also threatened to destroy any
Druze village in Mount Lebanon which joined or supported the rebellion.25
The dominant concern on both sides of the rebellion was loyalty and a
safeguarding of the social order. Christian villagers sent to fight the Druze
rebels were selected on the basis of their loyalty and reputation for brav-
ery. In a letter to the Maronite Patriarch, Bashir Shihab’s son, Amin, un-
derscored the necessity of “obedience” to Ibrahim Pasha and asked the Pa-


[PDF page 74]
56 / The Faces of Reform
triarch to help select three hundred young men from the Jubbat Bsharri,
whose ahali “were famed for their bravery” and were “reputed” to be
more “capable” than the other ahali of Jbayl.26
The religious affiliation of the inhabitants was inscribed within a dis-
course of loyalty. Christians of certain districts were mobilized because
they were not rebellious like the Druzes. Although Ibrahim used a Sunni
discourse to classify the Druze as heretics, he did not describe the Chris-
tians as infidels. It was their loyalty that informed their Christianity just
as it was the Druzes’ rebellion that brought about their heresy. Ibrahim
used Christians as translators in his interrogations of Druze prisoners, and
he supplied the Christians with weapons. They were given sixteen thou-
sand rifles to fight “the traitorous infidel Druze sect which denies the ex-
istence of God and his prophets. God willing, they and their property will
become plunder for you, and you are to keep the weapons for eternity.”27
More than at any previous time, the Druze elites found themselves iso-
lated. Already weakened by a sustained policy of Bashir (that predated the
Egyptian invasion) to consolidate power at the expense of traditionally
strong notable families, the Janbulats were further diminished and one of
the ‘Imad shaykhs was killed in the course of the uprising. Nevertheless,
the surviving rebels were granted aman. Ibrahim Pasha wrote to Bashir
Shihab, “Emir. As regards the Druzes of Jabal al-Shuf, let bygones be by-
gones. Do not harm them when they return to their homes. Allay their
fears and set their minds at rest.”28 Past crimes, for which more than a
thousand rebels had been cast into the “fires of hell,” were forgotten ac-
cording to the principle of letting bygones be bygones.
Discursively, history was turned back. The rehabilitated Druze shaykhs
returned to reclaim their land and titles. Their heresy had been in their re-
bellion. In other words, as far as Ibrahim was concerned, the Druzes were
“heretics” only when in the act of transgression. To submit was to lift the
stigma and become loyal subjects like any other. In short, the Christians
were mobilized by the authorities to divide and rule within the normal
elite Ottoman channels of careful control and dispensation. For Ibrahim
Pasha, the mobilization was a ruthless and utterly calculated move, but it
was also a temporary measure. In other words, the Christian identity of
the Lebanese came to the fore only as a method for the authorities to sep-
arate them from the Druzes, to arm them, and to send them against the
Druzes. Once the rebellion was over and the threat of disorder contained,
the Christian-Druze dichotomy was meant to be erased; all subjects were
to resume their former social standing. Hence the decision to abolish the
memory of past deeds and transgressions. The Druze rebels and Christian


[PDF page 75]
The Faces of Reform / 57
loyalists were commanded to return to being equally tranquil and obedient
villagers and subjects. To fulfill this reinscription of the Ottoman social or-
der, Ibrahim quickly ordered the disarming of the Christians. Nothing less
than total reassertion of the social status quo ante was acceptable.
In 1839, however, Sultan Abdülmecid, who found himself under
tremendous military pressure from Ibrahim Pasha and who was quite lit-
erally at the mercy of European diplomacy, promulgated the Gülhane de-
cree. The Tanzimat was officially inaugurated. The 1839 decree stipulated
the equality of Muslim and non-Muslim subjects before the law and in-
sisted that this equality was fully compatible with the empire’s glorious Is-
lamic past. However, even as Ottoman officials described obviously new
laws and rights as arising out of (as opposed to contradicting) an Islamic
Ottoman tradition, European powers viewed the Tanzimat as a mandate
for intervention on behalf of the empire’s non-Muslim subjects—and
what better place to begin than in what they perceived to be the belea-
guered tribal refuge of Mount Lebanon. As a result, Mount Lebanon be-
came a battlefield to determine the future of the Ottoman Empire. On its
terrain, Europeans, Ottomans, and locals were locked in a war over the
meaning and direction of the Tanzimat, which itself contained several
overlapping discourses of religious equality, Islamic tradition, political le-
gitimacy, past glory, and present sovereignty, all framed implicitly by a Eu-
rope-dominated modernity. The upshot was that Britain decided, based on
various interests of its own, to put an end to Mehmed Ali’s imperial ambi-
tions. In 1840 it led a campaign which ousted the Egyptians from Syria and
Mount Lebanon, restoring those areas to Ottoman rule. The rest of this
chapter examines the emergence of a local politics of restoration in the
shadow of the Tanzimat.
restoration politics
In 1840, Ibrahim Pasha faced yet another revolt against his onerous con-
scription policy. This time the revolt united Druzes and Christians and
succeeded because of timely Ottoman and European intervention. The re-
volt against Bashir Shihab and his Egyptian master, as well as their own at-
tempts to suppress it, were formulated as a return to legitimacy. Initially,
it seemed that the rebellion would be quickly snuffed out by Ibrahim
Pasha’s army. The Egyptian authorities were confident that they would
easily erase all traces of the rebellion “as if it never was.”29 Order was once
more equated with knowledge, rebellion with ignorance. Bashir accused
the rebels of having succumbed to the devilish “temptation” (waswasa)


[PDF page 76]
58 / The Faces of Reform
that filled their “ignorant” minds. Ibrahim was convinced that the revolt
was caused by fears planted by “some contemptible [men] lacking their
wits,” which had played havoc with the “deficient understanding” of the
local population. Like Abdullah Pasha, Ibrahim promised the insurgents
amnesty if they immediately reentered the domain of obedience. However,
also like Abdullah, he warned them that if their actions stemmed from
their “own volition”—in other words, if they chose to persist in their re-
bellion and ignore the window of opportunity that the discourse of igno-
rance opened for a peaceful surrender—then he would move to “annihi-
late” their “betrayal.”30
Although the rebellion was spontaneous and fragmented, lacking a sin-
gle leader and center, Druze and Christian rebels were united by their
common fear and hatred of foreign troops and oppressive duties, and, more
specifically, by their fear of conscription and disarmament. The common-
ers’ mobilization was characterized by a unity of purpose that was reflected
in a proclamation issued on 8 June 1840 at a church in Antilyas by Chris-
tian, Druze, Sunni, and Shi‘a villagers from Mount Lebanon; there, the
rebels declared themselves of “one mind and one voice.”31 Druze rebels
swore at the altar of a Christian saint and invoked his wrath on them if
they failed in their loyalty toward the other rebels. Religion was important
as a source of encouragement in these difficult times despite Bashir Shi-
hab’s promises to his Egyptian masters that his efforts “to divide Druze and
Christian will soon bear fruit.”32 After some hesitation and despite fear of
the apparently leaderless nature of the uprising, the Maronite Patriarch fi-
nally urged the priests and monks in Mount Lebanon to aid in al-qiyam al-
jumhuri, or the popular uprising of all sects. He insisted that al-salih al-
jumhuri, or the popular welfare, could be served only if Egypt’s oppressive
reign ended.33
The Maronite Patriarch’s intervention in the realm of politics was as un-
usual as that of commoners such as Abu-Samra Ghanim and Ahmad
Daghir, who took the lead in skirmishes with Ibrahim’s troops.34 Both the
Church and the ahali justified their invasion of political space as a tempo-
rary incursion caused by the unbearable “tyranny” that had befallen “the
people of this country.”35 Soon enough, however, several disaffected
shaykhs swelled the ranks of the rebels, including a Khazin shaykh from
Ghusta who proclaimed himself to be the military commander of the re-
bellion. These elites sought to provide the commoners’ rebellion with a
“respectable” face. They regarded the uprising as a means to restore the
Ottoman regime and maintain the privileges that they claimed had been
usurped by Bashir Shihab and the Egyptians. They assumed, for example,


[PDF page 77]
The Faces of Reform / 59
that the Sultan’s decrees promoting good administration in no way super-
seded their privileges of old. Like the commoners and the Maronite
Church, they fought against “tyranny” and in the hope “that things
should revert to the way they had been.”36 For the rebel elites liberty, Gül-
hane, and tradition amounted to one and the same thing: a full restoration
of their traditional social position and a revived notable politics. Accord-
ingly, and on behalf of the Shi‘a, Druze, and Christian communities, Yusuf
Shihab, Faris Hubaysh, Haydar Qa’idbey, and Francis Khazin jointly ap-
pealed to France in the name of liberty, Britain in the name of humanity,
and the Ottoman Empire in the name of legitimacy. They begged the Sul-
tan to once again grace them with his benevolent justice; they urged the
French to involve themselves in the quest for “liberty” (but not, signifi-
cantly, equality) and the restoration of their “original and legitimate
ruler”; and they pleaded with the British to intercede on their behalf so
that they could soon enjoy the benefaction of the Gülhane decree.37
None of the rebels gave much thought to the contradictory memories of
the past that were bound to come into play if and when the Egyptian occu-
pation ended. Nor did they ponder the incongruity of a discourse of
restoration in an Ottoman Empire that was itself undergoing profound
change in the age of the Tanzimat. The British and Ottoman governments
contributed to this ambiguity, for the British proposed and the Ottoman
government approved of sending secret agents such as Richard Wood to
encourage the notables in their revolt. Wood promised a full restoration of
past “privileges” to several key families. He declared that he worked for a
return of the “legitimate” Ottoman sovereign and guaranteed “the inhab-
itants of Lebanon the enjoyment of their ancient franchises.”38 Jesuit
priests such as Père Ryllo and French aristocratic figures seeking to expe-
rience some Eastern romance joined the effort, each promising and believ-
ing that they held the destiny of Mount Lebanon in their hands. At this
critical stage, therefore, it was not Ottomans who arrived at the shores of
Mount Lebanon to rally the rebels but Europeans who acted on behalf of
the Ottomans and who supplied the ships and material for a restoration of
Syria to its “lawful” sovereign.39 Europe, particularly Great Britain, repre-
sented the reforming Ottoman Empire in its own periphery.40
translating the tanzimat
In the aftermath of the restoration of the Sultan’s rule to Syria, Ottoman
officials were stymied by the ambiguity inherent in the Ottoman project of
reform. Precisely because the Tanzimat was not a coherent package of re-


[PDF page 78]
60 / The Faces of Reform
forms, it was elaborated as much in its application as in its textual formu-
lation. Precisely (and perhaps most crucially) because British power read
Mount Lebanon in religious tribal terms, what to the Ottomans was a sec-
ular project of imperial renewal was expressed in Mount Lebanon from the
outset as a sectarian project of local restoration. Restoration politics and
the vacuum created by Bashir’s downfall created the space for reworked
communal identities to emerge in the public sphere. Druze and Maronite
leaders were responsive to the presence of many powers, each of which
sought out leaders to act as interlocutors for the religious communities of
Mount Lebanon. Therefore, although the Druze Nakad shaykhs had his-
torically controlled only a few particular districts in the Shuf region, they
appealed to the British—themselves already predisposed to divide the na-
tives into religious “tribes” or “races”— on behalf of all the Druzes. Simi-
larly, the Maronite Church spoke on behalf of the entire Maronite ta’ifa.41
In the face of these claims, Ottoman reformers were at a loss to distin-
guish between “legitimacy” as understood by Druze Nakad notables and
“liberty” as embraced by their Christian tenants.42 The Tanzimat embod-
ied both principles in the person of the Sultan, who as a legitimate ruler
decreed the religious equality of all his subjects. But what about regions
like Mount Lebanon where the Sultan was absent and where liberty and
legitimacy were open to fundamentally incompatible interpretations? Ot-
toman reformers obviously did not take into account the demographic
character of Mount Lebanon. How was equality of treatment of religious
communities going to be reconciled with demographic majorities and mi-
norities, especially after the Maronite Patriarch declared the Maronites to
be the “majority” of the population?43 How were “local customs” (which
the Ottoman government pledged to uphold in Mount Lebanon) to be ac-
commodated within the “new laws” of the Tanzimat?44 How exactly was
Selim Pasha, thrust into Mount Lebanon to restore Ottoman sovereignty,
to accomplish his task when it was European ships that had allowed him to
invade, European weapons that had enabled him to fight, and European
munitions that had permitted him to reaffirm (if not buy) the loyalty of
the rebels in the first place?
These unanswered questions gnawed at the coherence of Ottoman
restoration. The transfer of the Ottoman governor’s seat from Acre to
Beirut and the investiture of Bashir Shihab’s second cousin with power in
place of the old emir in 1840 did little to resolve the confusion of restora-
tion politics. The decree confirming Bashir Qasim as emir of Mount
Lebanon was addressed to the “Pride, the Glory and the Notability, the
Shaykhs of the Druze tribes.” Bashir Qasim was appointed as the lawful


[PDF page 79]
The Faces of Reform / 61
ruler of the “Mountain of the Druzes,” a term that reflected the power and
demographic balance of the old regime, when Druze families dominated
the social order.45 The realities of the European-aided restoration of Ot-
toman rule as well as the interregnum of Egyptian occupation for nearly
ten years, however, rendered even the term “Mountain of the Druzes,” or
Cebel-i Düruz, an anachronism that would be replaced by 1845, in Ot-
toman usage at least, by the term “Mount Lebanon,” or Cebel-i Lübnan.46
Bashir Qasim ruled more than just “Druze tribes,” and Cebel-i Düruz en-
compassed regions which fell under the influence of an increasingly active
Maronite Church.
Ottoman sovereignty of the kind stressed in the Gülhane decree re-
mained a fiction, and the local elites knew it. To that end, they sought to re-
align themselves, however ambivalently, behind one or another of the
Great Powers while they reaffirmed their “unwavering” loyalty to the
Sublime Porte. European states needed local communities to justify their
involvement in the Ottoman Empire. France under François Guizot
worked hard to reestablish communications with the Maronite Church,
while Britain sought to “obtain for [the Druzes] the best security that
hereafter they shall not be disturbed in the free enjoyment of their own in-
stitutions & liberty, & security for their persons and property.”47 In an ef-
fort to regain their sequestered proprieties, Druze notables at once invoked
the rights of restoration before Ottoman officials and promised British
representatives that they were capable of “delivering up their Country to
the protection of Great Britain.”48 In turn, the Maronite Church cultivated
its relationship with both Catholic nations and the Sublime Porte.49
The point of contact and collaboration between the Great Powers and
the local elites was communal; the problem lay in the definition of the
community—its boundaries, its structure, and its history. In a bid to re-
duce tensions that his own reckless promises helped create, Wood sug-
gested a sectarian administration for Mount Lebanon in the early months
of 1841. He proposed that a religiously mixed council be created under
Bashir Qasim that would include three members “elected” by the Maro-
nite, Orthodox, and Greek Catholic patriarchs respectively. To these would
be added, among others, one Druze, one Sunni, and one Shi‘a to strike a
communal balance.50 Wood’s proposal satisfied neither the Druzes nor the
Maronite Church, which had stepped forward during the restoration to
represent the Maronite “clergy and people.”51 As outlined in a list of de-
mands submitted to the Austrians in 1840, the Maronite Church explicitly
stated that it was distinct from all other sects and desired to be treated
“without being mixed with any other sect.” Its sense of community was


[PDF page 80]
62 / The Faces of Reform
not territorially bounded, for it demanded protection for all Maronites
“wherever they may be found.”52 In addition, its request for “favors” from
the Sultan for the “Maronite Patriarch, his Bishops, his Maronite clergy
and people” indicated not only a hierarchical sense of who constituted the
Maronite sect but a fairly clear demarcation between the people (al-sha‘b)
and the clergy.53 Most of the appeal focused on the ecclesiastical world, but
the twelfth demand explicitly broached the topic of secular politics. It
stated that the “ruler of Mount Lebanon and the Anti-Lebanon according
to old convention (al-mu‘tad al-qadim) will only be a Maronite from the
noble Shihab family, as the majority of the population of the aforemen-
tioned Mountains are Maronites, and that the Ruler be appointed without
the involvement of the Sublime Porte.” In te thirteenth point the Patriarch
asked that there be only one taxation annually— one miri and one jizya (a
poll tax collected from non-Muslims)— and that all other taxes not “sanc-
tioned of old” be abolished.
The Maronite Church’s explicit involvement in politics was the clearest
indication of a break with traditional order. Its claim that tradition legit-
imized the appointment of a Maronite ruler over Mount Lebanon was im-
mediately rejected by Druze notables. The fluid political situation of 1840
allowed the indigenous elites to make new political claims that invoked
mythologized sectarian pasts.54 Their petitions and letters that spoke of an
historically Christian or Druze Mount Lebanon revealed an incipient cul-
ture of sectarianism in its moment of production. The conflicting appeals
of the elites reflected a developing sectarian consciousness that was torn
between old and new and oriented both to Europe and to the Ottoman Em-
pire. The demands submitted by the Patriarch were indicative of these cur-
rents. The Maronites, according to the Patriarch, were indeed a ta’ifa, or
sect, seeking Austrian protection, but the meaning of that ta’ifa was still
predominantly ecclesiastical. Although the Church claimed to speak on be-
half of all Maronites, its notion of the community remained firmly within
old regime understandings and social boundaries. At the top of the hierar-
chy sat the Patriarch, himself from one of the great families of Mount
Lebanon, and then came the bishops, among whom were members of the
Karam and Khazin families. Following the bishops came the clergy and fi-
nally the people. All that was new in the petition was the claim of a tradi-
tion that sanctioned a Maronite ruler over Mount Lebanon.55


[PDF page 81]
The Faces of Reform / 63
the violence of 1841
The most obvious sign, indeed the culmination, of the transition from tra-
ditional notable politics to restoration politics was the revolt by Druze no-
tables against Bashir Qasim and the Christian ahali of Dayr al-Qamar in
1841.56 A struggle over land and control of taxation underpinned and gave
the impetus for intercommunal tensions, which led to the first major sec-
tarian clashes between Maronite and Druze in Mount Lebanon.57 As it
happened, the Druze Nakads and the Janbulats returned from exile in
Egypt to reclaim their former properties. Although Bashir Qasim restored
all the former properties to their “legitimate” owners, he did not restore
Dayr al-Qamar to its Nakad shaykhs, and he handed over control of several
other villages to his relatives. The Druze notables, taking up the slogan of
restoration and believing what had been promised them by both the Ot-
tomans and the British, demanded a full restitution of their rights.58 The
Maronite villagers of Dayr al-Qamar disputed the right of certain shaykhs
to their properties.59 They demanded rights of protection and equality that
they thought were guaranteed to them by the Gülhane proclamation and
the promises of Wood. Although they were suspicious of Bashir Qasim,
whom they accused of having led the Druze shaykhs against them, “plun-
dering our properties, money and animals,” they were unwilling to return
to vassalage under their former Druze lords.60 The Druze Nakads, there-
fore, understood the Tanzimat as restoration. The Maronite villagers saw it
as a rupture with Druze control, and they were backed in their interpreta-
tion by the Maronite Church, which, in turn, called for the reestablishment
of a “traditional” Maronite emirate. It took only a spark to set off war.
The violence that occurred in Dayr al-Qamar in 1841 is worth recount-
ing because it sheds light on some of the new features that characterized
restoration politics. The chronicler Mishaqa wrote:
A Christian from Dayr al-Qamar was hunting with his gun on B‘aqlin
land, and a Druze from there objected. Bad blood surfaced between
them, and helpers came to both sides, the fray ending with the discharge
of weapons. The cry reached Dayr al-Qamar that the people of B‘aqlin
had killed their men, so the Nakad shaykhs got on their horses and rode
to the place to quell the disturbance, and the men of Dayr al-Qamar too
came armed and running. When they arrived they found the men of
B‘aqlin gathered together and some men were slain. Shots were fired
and a fierce battle was fought until the B‘aqlin men were driven back
61
with all those who had come to help them.
From Mishaqa’s own testimony, the incident began in “B‘aqlin land”


[PDF page 82]
64 / The Faces of Reform
over a seemingly trivial issue and then escalated to the point of pitched
battles that raged between the two villages. over two dozen Druzes were
slain. The shaykhs and the Maronite Patriarch tried to stop the fighting
and indeed, for a short while, a truce was called.62 However, on learning
that Bashir Qasim was on his way to the Shuf to organize the tax collec-
tion, several Nakad shaykhs and other Druzes from the Shuf laid siege to
Dayr al-Qamar, trapping Bashir Qasim inside. After a three-week siege,
the Druzes finally succeeded in ambushing the emir. They beat him
senseless and stripped him of his clothing. Moreover, the Nakads slew
Christians who had served them for years and had even traveled with
them in their exile. The fact that the Druze shaykhs had killed those who
had served them violated the traditions of both hospitality and loyalty
that had underpinned the old regime. That the Druze had brought in out-
siders from neighboring villages increased the sense of unease. Quite
simply, in the eyes of the Dayr al-Qamar ahali, the shaykhs had betrayed
tradition; they had killed after giving aman. The shaykhs for their part
were incensed at the alleged disloyalty and haughtiness exhibited by the
ahali, which had resulted in conflict and the death of several Druze
shaykhs.63
Several layers of conflict were involved in the sectarian clashes at Dayr
al-Qamar. On one level, an elite struggle between the Druze notables and
Bashir Qasim for control of land and taxation was expressed as a Druze-
Maronite confrontation. On another level, a social crisis was represented
by the refusal of Maronite commoners of Dayr al-Qamar to accept Druze
notable hegemony as well as by the insistence of Druze notables on im-
posing their “legitimate” rights on Christian subjects amid a breakdown of
the old regime symbiosis that had bound Druze elites to the Maronite
Church. On a third level, a marked redefinition of the relationship be-
tween religion and politics had profound implications for a multireligious
society. The old regime had been dependent on a notion of a quietist reli-
gion and passive subjecthood that had underpinned and yet was separate
from a nonsectarian notable politics. Restoration politics, however, had
singled out the religious identity of the local inhabitants as the point of de-
parture for a modern reformed and ambivalent Ottoman sovereignty in
Mount Lebanon. Although material factors related to taxation and control
of land underlay the violence of 1841, the Christian villagers of Dayr al-
Qamar rejected the control of the Nakads because they were Druze nota-
bles. In this new development the social, the political, and the religious
were explicitly and, following the bloodshed at Dayr al-Qamar, antagonis-


[PDF page 83]
The Faces of Reform / 65
tically fused together. A far-reaching crisis of coexistence emerged. Imme-
diately, the fighting spread to other regions of the Shuf. Hundreds of vil-
lagers, both Druze and Christian, were slain. A feeling of uncertainty pre-
vailed. What had begun as a local conflict in B‘aqlin degenerated into open
conflict across the Shuf. The smallest of incidents threatened to explode
into open warfare. The triviality of the hunting incident captured the ter-
rifying reality embodied in communal politics. Conflict could happen any-
where and anytime. The uneasiness was further exacebated because com-
munal boundaries were shifting; religion was detached from its social
environment and treated it as a cohesive, exclusivist, and organic force;
neighbors suddenly became potential enemies. Yet just as unsettling was
the fact that coreligionists often refused to aid one another during sectar-
ian clashes. Few Christians from outside the Shuf bothered with the Chris-
tians of the Shuf, just as the Druzes of the Matn refrained from siding with
the Druzes of the Shuf. Following the logic of sectarian discourse, those
who did not help their coreligionists were labeled “traitors.”64
It is important, however, to place these developments in perspective.
Precisely because sectarianism was not an explosion of latent or endemic
religious animosities, because it was not a primordial resurgence, there was
still room for the elites to maneuver, and there was time to define the con-
tours of an emerging sectarian landscape. The Maronite Church did not
sever contact with the Druze elites. Following the outbreak of hostilities, it
called for tranquillity and order across Mount Lebanon. Maronite villagers
continued to live under Druze shaykhs, and families such as the Janbulats
still employed Christian teachers and advisors.65 Even before the Dayr al-
Qamar incident, the Druze notables had tried to put an end to this devel-
opment of sectarianism by evoking memories of old-regime elite solidar-
ity. They had urged the Christian shaykhs to unite with them in obedience
to the Sultan and in their love for and sincere relationships with each
other. They had even pleaded that the notables of each ta’ifa should work
for their common interest, noting that the rank and station of each should
be preserved according to tradition and right and that disputes should be
settled peacefully in accordance with customary law.66 To the extent that
the Maronite Church and the secular Christian notables never for a mo-
ment contemplated opening the realm of politics to the ahali, they were in
sympathy with the Druze proposal. Yet while old-regime traditions of elite
compromise were based on common values and a stable social order that
regulated the distribution of wealth among notable families, restoration
politics altered the ground rules and marked the beginning of an open-


[PDF page 84]
66 / The Faces of Reform
ended struggle for a definition of the community and control of land in
which the söz sahibleri were no longer the masters of words.
Reform arrived in Mount Lebanon in a complex of guises. There was the
specific text of the Gülhane decree—and many interpretations of it. There
were the many solemn promises made by Ottoman and British officials to
local notables. And there were overlapping discourses of reform, legiti-
macy, liberty, and security. In contrast to the old regime, where the trans-
gression of social order invited a defined, ritualized retribution, the
restoration marked the autonomous entrance of the ahali into, and hence
the unsettling of, politics. Simultaneously, however, the elites embarked
on a frantic search for a political solution to close the door on such subal-
tern mobilization. They drew heavily on old-regime metaphors and under-
standings even as their competing claims steadily narrowed the areas for
compromise. The rest of this study will therefore dwell on key moments of
the collapse and reconstitution of the social order, up to and including
1860. Following 1841, restoration politics gave way to a new form of sec-
tarian politics that was focused on redefining Mount Lebanon geographi-
cally, politically, and culturally.


[PDF page 85]
5 Reinventing Mount Lebanon
T
he violence of 1841, which initially pitted the Christian villagers of Dayr
al-Qamar against their returning Druze shaykhs, unleashed an open-
ended struggle among elites over the meaning of tradition. Chroniclers
and clergymen, notables and Ottoman officials, and, with overbearing con-
fidence, foreign missionaries and European consuls—all those who inter-
vened in and shaped recorded history— debated how best to bring tran-
quillity to Mount Lebanon. In the spirit of the Tanzimat and in accordance
with the principles of restoration, they agreed on one thing: that order in
Mount Lebanon would not infringe on its “ancient custom.” The problem
lay in defining this custom and agreeing on what constituted tradition.
Even before Bashir Shihab’s death in exile in 1850, the meaning and mem-
ory of his long and complex reign had become completely ensnared in a
struggle for succession that owed more to an invention of tradition than to
tradition itself.1 As strongly as the Maronite Church favored the restora-
tion of a putatively Christian emirate, the Druze notables who had borne
the brunt of Bashir’s ambition vehemently opposed it. The hapless Bashir
Qasim pleaded his own cause. At its simplest, the issue that divided the
elites was land. Who was to control it? to rule it? to administer it? At its
most complex, the issue was reconceptualizing this land and the communi-
ties that inhabited it. In the process, and in the shadow of a European-
Ottoman concern for progress, Mount Lebanon was geographically recon-
figured and communally reinvented.
Various elite efforts following the violence of 1841 to reinscribe strict
political and social boundaries reached their climax in December 1842 with
a joint European-Ottoman decision to partition Mount Lebanon along re-
ligious lines. In 1845, the Ottoman foreign minister, S¸ ekib Efendi, further
reorganized Mount Lebanon’s administration along communal lines. This
67


[PDF page 86]
68 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
chapter explores how the elites began to politically reconstitute themselves
in allegedly traditional sectarian terms while the very basis of tradition—
absolute Ottoman sovereignty which existed “for all time”—was being
undermined at every turn. I contend that an informal subjecthood to Eu-
ropean powers developed alongside formal subjecthood to a changing Ot-
toman state. Although the Sultan remained sovereign over Mount
Lebanon, the presence of Jesuit and American Protestant missionaries and
of agents such as Richard Wood tacitly widened the domain of obedience to
include France and Great Britain. Unlike their relationship with their Sul-
tan, which was marked by an allegiance supposedly impervious to the pas-
sage of historical time, local elites nurtured an informal alliance with for-
eign powers very much defined by historical evolutionary time. Not only
was the interaction between the Maronite elites and France, to give an ex-
ample, validated by specific historical documents or treaties, such as Louis
XIV’s letter of protection to the Maronites in 1649 and the Treaty of Paris
of 1856, but it was increasingly articulated through a discourse of progress
and civilization. Neither Maronite nor Druze leaders sought to break with
the Ottoman Empire, but each recognized individual European powers as
the protectors of their community and as arbitrators of their political des-
tiny, as players who could influence the course of politics as much as and,
in some cases, more than the Sultan himself.
Mount Lebanon was communally reinvented in the sense that a public
and political sectarian identity replaced a nonsectarian politics of notability
that had been the hallmark of prereform society. This shift was not nearly
as simple or as complete as many observers have assumed. Historians have
elucidated many factors that aggravated the situation, including the Egyp-
tian invasion, the Eastern Question politics, and the rise of the Maronite
Church, but they have all assumed that these historical causes cleared the
way for the reemergence of a coherent, primordial religious identity. They
have not examined the anxiety inherent in this new elite sectarian project;
nor have they sufficiently noted its obvious contradictions, its tentative-
ness, and its underlying fragility.
In large part, historians have missed these factors because the sources
they have relied on have taken communal identity for granted. The volu-
minous European consular correspondence on the sectarian strife, which
forms the backbone of most modern historical narratives of this period, is
a plethora of invaluable reports, dispatches, letters, and memoranda. His-
torians have sifted through these and have disinterred the complex politics
behind the correspondence, and they have elucidated why and how the
powers acted in the way they did; they have cross-checked sources to pro-


[PDF page 87]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 69
duce consistent and balanced narratives, stripping away the conceit of each
European power to represent all local history. But they have left undis-
turbed, indeed they have reproduced, the single greatest fallacy of such
historiography: the notion of the pure communal actor.
narrating violence
The most preponderant treatises on sectarian violence were those produced
by the European powers. In 1842, Lord Howden of the House of Lords, de-
manded to know what the British government planned to do about the sit-
uation of “anarchy” that had rendered movement in Syria as difficult as
traveling “in the interior of Africa.”2 The only answer Lord Aberdeen
could provide with any assuredness was that Britain would redouble its ur-
gent remonstrations about the pace of Ottoman reform.3 From the outset,
British observers resorted to an Orientalist knowledge to comprehend the
events that unfolded in Mount Lebanon. “Disputes about the possession of
land and trivial matters,” wrote consul Hugh Rose, “were the causes of
quarrel between the two sects, whose mutual animosity is proverbial.”4
Lord Aberdeen elaborated on these sentiments in a dispatch to Stratford
Canning, the British ambassador in Istanbul:
The enmity between the Druses and the Maronites of Mount Lebanon is
of ancient date. A difference of religious belief, added to a struggle for
political supremacy between two parties, the numerical superiority of
one being more than counterbalanced by the warlike qualities of the
other, has continually produced contests between them. Of late years the
oppressive rule of Mehemet [Mehmed] Ali, acting nearly equally upon
both, maintained peace between the rival parties; but their jealousies and
animosities revived on the departure of the Egyptians, and have brought
5
about the warfare which has desolated the Lebanon.
Although they cast the fanatical antimodern “Turk” as a figure who in his
shadowy manifestations cunningly and secretly desired to upset the path
of reform and to harm Christians, British diplomats conceived of the sec-
tarian “tribes” of Mount Lebanon as unmodern. In their eyes, Druzes and
Maronites did not fight a rational war; they reenacted an ancestral conflict.
By underscoring the “proverbial” mutual animosity of Muslim and
Christian, consul Rose, who had arrived in Syria as part of the Allied
forces in 1840 and whose knowledge of local history was sketchy to say the
least, instinctively drew on another of the basic European assumptions
concerning the Ottoman Empire: the inherent Islamic hostility toward


[PDF page 88]
Map 4. The Druze District of Lebanon. (Reproduced with permission
from The Missionary Herald: Reports from Ottoman Syria, 1819 –1870,
ed. Kamal Salibi and Yusuf K. Khoury. Amman, Jordan: Royal Institute
for Interfaith Studies, 1995; originally appeared in The Annual Reports of
ABCFM, vol. 35, 1844)


[PDF page 89]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 71
Christianity. Rose insisted that the Druzes were pawns of a lurking Ot-
toman Muslim fanaticism that desired to destroy Christianity in the East.
As Canning told Aberdeen, “Mr. Moore and Mr. Wood agree with Colonel
Rose and the other Consuls at Beyrout in describing the revived fanaticism
of the Turks, their mistrust and increasing hatred of everything Christian
and their secret preparations for defence against Foreign aggression.”6
British and French attitudes toward the local violence marginalized the
spontaneity of the violence and minimized the agency of its perpetrators.
European consuls invariably blamed the violence on alleged Ottoman neg-
ligence, or, more frequently, they referred to an insidious Ottoman plot to
provoke Druzes and Maronites into a war in a bid to reassert direct rule in
Mount Lebanon.7 Their emphasis on supposed Turkish machinations gave
structure to the chaotic events that transpired on the ground.8
France had a far less ambivalent attitude than Britain, which was torn
between sympathy for the Druzes as a counterweight to French influence
on the Maronites and concern for the rights of Christians. The French gov-
ernment was busy trying to mend bridges with the Maronites following
the debacle of French support for Mehmed Ali in 1840.9 For their part, the
Jesuits, who had enjoyed amicable relations with the Egyptian authorities,
shuddered at the prospect of restored Ottoman rule. Following Druze at-
tacks on Jesuit outposts in the Bekaa in 1841, Benoît Planchet, the Jesuit
missionary who had arrived in the early 1830s, wrote that the true “goal”
of the Druzes was to drive the Christians out of Mount Lebanon entirely.10
For Planchet, the dimensions of the catastrophe were all too clear: the Ot-
tomans secretly supported the Druzes in their efforts to reduce Mount
Lebanon’s freedom and to reinstate the “despotism of past times.” The Ot-
toman appointment in early 1842 of Ömer Pasha to directly rule Mount
Lebanon in place of Bashir Qasim confirmed Planchet’s worst fear: “Little
by little the habits, manners and law of the Muslims will be introduced
into the Mountain. It will no longer be what it was: a place of liberty for the
Catholic religion, a refuge for persecuted Christians and converts from Is-
lam.”11
To Planchet and the rest of the Jesuits, to Rose, to Canning, to the
French consul Prosper Bourée and to France’s ambassador in Istanbul, the
Baron de Bourqueney, the intervention of Europe was imperative. What
was at stake in Mount Lebanon was not simply the resolution of an age-old
tribal conflict but the course of modernity, which now stood at a cross-
roads. The Ottoman decision to appoint Ömer Pasha forced the European
powers to temper their own rivalries and to underscore their commitment
to the “just claims of the Christian Powers.”12 In a series of “joint notes,”


[PDF page 90]
72 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
the European powers demanded a non-Ottoman government in Mount
Lebanon despite the fact that several European observers recognized that
direct Ottoman rule might indeed have been best for security and order.13
Canning again invoked the native state of mind. He claimed that such Ot-
toman rule not only was in “direct contradiction with the spirit and prin-
ciples of the later intervention” but “could only be acceptable to the inhab-
itants while their natural feelings are perverted by local and temporary
passions.”14
Yet since these local “passions” threatened to lead to further violence,
some solution had to be found immediately. With this in mind, the Euro-
pean ambassadors converged in the spring and summer of 1842 in Istanbul
to finally settle the problem of sectarian violence. Despite their own quar-
rels, the ambassadors agreed that they had nothing but “benevolent views”
to offer the Sultan on his tentative course toward “modern civilization.”15
Not for a moment did they pause to reflect on their understanding of the
task at hand. They insisted that the origin of the recent violence lay in the
murky primordial past—a past, they hastened to add, which the tribes of
Mount Lebanon in some senses still inhabited and one for which many fa-
natical “Turks” still yearned.
Joining them in Istanbul were numerous Ottoman representatives led
by the foreign minister, Sarim Efendi. Ottoman officials reacted to the sec-
tarian violence by referring to the Lebanese communities as if they were
on a progressive spectrum. At one end was the Sultan, enshrined in Ot-
toman discourse as the all-powerful patriarch of the Ottoman nation, who
had benevolently reached out to all his subjects through the Tanzimat. At
the other end were the Druzes and Maronites, “two sects [that] are full of
sedition and abominable wickedness,” stressed one Ottoman report, “de-
serving all reproach.”16
Such excoriations of the Lebanese communities masked the unease and
frustration evident in the dispatches sent from the restored province by its
governors and military commanders. The acute awareness of Ottoman of-
ficials that European powers intervened through sectarian lines [mezheb-
das¸lık vesile] reinforced their belief in the crucial importance of centraliza-
tion.17 To them, the violence in Mount Lebanon served as a poignant
example of the backwardness of the periphery of their empire. Instead of
the fanatical “Turk” being the antimodern, as in European concepts of
modernity, now it was the Lebanese sects who served as a foil for a mod-
ernizing Ottoman identity. “Because blood feuds are so important to the
inhabitants of rural Syria, as they are for the Albanians,” read one dispatch
concerning the activities of a Druze notable, “[he] acted in accordance with


[PDF page 91]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 73
the proclivity of his race.”18 Like the Europeans, Ottoman functionaries
classified the Lebanese struggles as age-old; like the Europeans, the Ot-
tomans insisted that they sought only to restore order and tranquillity.19
But unlike the Europeans they had neither a clear sense of mission nor an
overwhelming confidence in their ability to have their commands obeyed.
To be sure, the Ottoman authorities differentiated metropole from pe-
riphery and indiscriminately lumped together Yezidis, Druzes, and Alba-
nians; they nevertheless framed their discussion of Mount Lebanon as a
tale of imperial survival. It was not simply that the Druzes and Maronites
were involved in an ancient conflict that would continue “until the Day of
Judgement” but that their disputes threatened the foundations of empire
by inviting European interference.20 On one level, therefore, the Ottoman
reaction to the violence may be read as evidence of a state in transition and
an empire caught between two worlds and two times. As the imperial hon-
orifics that gilded the Sultan’s name suggested, one world evoked a former
grandeur embedded in the idea of absolute Ottoman sovereignty that en-
dured across, and hence defied, the passage of historical time. The other
world was one in which time had passed the empire by or at least threat-
ened to pass it by; it was a world of European domination and intervention,
of Mehmed Ali’s modernization schemes, and of a growing sense of the
backwardness of the empire—the sum of which produced the Gülhane de-
cree. This sense of transition was inscribed in the dispatches themselves.
Men like Mustafa Pasha, commander of the Ottoman army, who was
sent in late 1841 to settle the affairs of Mount Lebanon following the sec-
tarian clashes, epitomized the Ottoman predicament. He began his mission
with a reassertion of social order.21 He summoned the söz sahibleri to
Beirut and relieved Bashir Qasim of his powers; he informed the notables
that the return of the Shihabs was out of the question and announced the
appointment of Ömer Pasha—a high-ranking Ottoman officer of Croatian
origin and a member of Mustafa Pasha’s staff—as governor of Mount
Lebanon.22 Beyond reasserting Ottoman authority in the name of the re-
forming Sultan, Mustafa Pasha symbolically and physically broke with the
old regime by finally abolishing the Shihab dynasty, which had ruled since
1697. Yet this rupture was not complete, for although the Tanzimat was
concerned with building a modern nation, little in the dispatches indicated
how this modernization was to be accomplished.23 Precisely because the
Tanzimat lent itself to a variety of interpretations, including a European
one that mandated interference, the Ottomans considered the reorganiza-
tion of local administration imperative for stifling European involve-
ment.24 The Tanzimat placed the Ottomans in a quandary, for while they


[PDF page 92]
Map 5. Carte de La Terre Sainte en 1849. (From Antoine Philippe Houzé, Atlas
universel historique et géographique. Paris: Librairie Universelle, 1850)


[PDF page 93]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 75
repeatedly pledged to obey the Sultan’s will to reform, they viewed the na-
tives as essentially unreformable subjects. Ottoman officials were certain,
however, that reform and state violence went hand in hand; public order
and security could be guaranteed only by bringing local notables to heel
and by removing their “stupid, silly and fickle” followers from the realm
of politics.25
using the past
Far from being passive objects of the search for a political solution, the lo-
cal elites deftly took advantage of imperial concern to cling to what they
considered their birthright: property, prestige, and a monopoly on politics.
As they outmaneuvered one another, they gave credence to the narratives
reverberating in London, Paris, and Istanbul. Both Druze and Maronite
elites found that their desire for power, and their equally tenacious convic-
tion that only one of them deserved to wield it, could best be served by rep-
resenting themselves as the guardians of tradition and social order and
their rivals as the instigators of perennial perfidy. Druze notables declared
themselves at once to be ardent Muslims loyal to the Sultan and faithful
allies of Great Britain.26 Maronite leaders proclaimed that they were, in
fact, the dutiful supporters of the House of Osman at the same time as
they appealed to France in the name of Christian solidarity.27 Both laid
claim to the mantle of loyalty, and both deployed any number of languages
of legitimacy, particularly those of faith and loyalty, to bolster their re-
spective causes.
Following the fighting at Dayr al-Qamar in 1841, the Maronite Patri-
arch “reminded” the Sublime Porte that Bashir Shihab and the Christians
of Mount Lebanon had always been loyal to the Ottoman state and that it
was the Druzes who had betrayed the Sultan and sided with the Egyptians;
it was only when the Druzes realized that Ibrahim Pasha’s army was
doomed that they switched sides, but in Dayr al-Qamar their true colors
were revealed.28 For his part, the Druze shaykh Khattar al-‘Imad submit-
ted a petition to the Ottoman government in which he outlined his under-
standing of the same events. The Druze leader framed his discussion as an
epic battle between “the sword of Islam,” which he claimed the Druzes
wielded with great pride on behalf of the Sublime Sultanate, and the ene-
mies of Islam, represented by the European-supported Maronites. He
stated that “abandoning the law of Islam, the heretics intended to weaken
Islam and [replace it] with the ways of the infidels, and to hand over the
country to the brigands.” The prospect of such corruption, of heresy re-


[PDF page 94]
76 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
placing faith, “depressed our souls and filled our hearts with disgust,” and
so the battle commenced between the Druzes and the ahali of Dayr al-Qa-
mar.29
What matters here is not the truth of these claims but their underlying
similarity and their mutual commitment to and dependence on a hierar-
chical social order to explain events. ‘Imad’s citing of categorical religious
difference should not obscure his awareness of an essentially social strug-
gle. He freely admitted that the conflict began when the Druze muqata‘jis
attempted to collect the miri tax from the recalcitrant villagers, whom he
contemptuously described as “all along being our lowly and abject [Chris-
tian] subjects.” And he wondered, given this history, “in what conceivable
manner could such behaviour from wretched villagers be endured.”30 It
was not the Christianity of the villagers that worried him; it was their in-
version of social order at the behest of the Shihab emirs and foreign agents.
‘Imad’s concern and his repeated references to foreign agents indicated
that the rituals of old-regime politics were now being played on a new
stage—“a theatre of intrigue,” as an American missionary put it— erected
after 1840.31 The flurry of appeals to different powers marked the attempt
by the local elites to appreciate and adjust to its contours. The tempo of
politics had changed; so too had its stakes. In an era of progressive time, the
elites were terrified of being outmaneuvered and left behind in an
avowedly modern world. Hospitality was extended to foreigners—to con-
suls, to merchants, and to missionaries—not simply as a courtesy to
strangers from distant lands but as an imperative for survival. Both Druze
and Maronite leaders realized that European power could be profitably and
decisively turned to their own advantage. They had seen Ibrahim Pasha’s
modern army destroy several Ottoman armies, only to be crushed by still
greater and more modern European forces.32 They were well aware that
European ships had liberated Syria; European agents had supplied an esti-
mated forty thousand muskets to the region; and European (and Ameri-
can) missionaries provided much-sought-after modern medicine.33 Trade
opportunities also increased, and notables provided land and labor for
newly established silk factories. In return, Europeans and Americans
showered both groups with such attention that it deluded them into
“thinking that they were something important in this world,” in the words
of the French consul Bourée.34 They were given vistas into a much wider
world and the illusion that they were major players in it.
Above all, however, the local elites knew that in the post-Tanzimat
world this power was to be had only along sectarian lines. The objective of


[PDF page 95]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 77
Druze and Maronite elites was not to confirm European or Ottoman atti-
tudes toward them but to manipulate the concern for a reestablishment of
order by presenting themselves as the only genuine interlocutors of the so-
called primordial sectarian communities that inhabited Mount Lebanon.
They sought to transform their religious communities into political com-
munities and to harness invented traditions to their respective causes. The
construction of a political sectarian identity did not come naturally; it en-
tailed petitions, meetings, and the incessant application of moral as well as
physical pressure by the leaders in each community to overcome local ri-
valries, regional differences, and family loyalties.35 Maronite and Druze
elites each strove to present a unified front to the Ottoman state and the
European powers, effectively ignoring a long history of nonsectarian lead-
ership.36 The Maronite Patriarch was well aware of the difficulty of mar-
shaling the Maronites into an organized political community, especially
when an Ottoman commissioner, Selim Bey, was sent to Mount Lebanon
in 1842 to determine whether the local population was in favor of direct
Ottoman administration. The Patriarch made it clear that “we will not ac-
cept, do not desire and will not be content” with any ruler except a Chris-
tian Shihab. Although he insisted that such rule over Lebanon followed
“our custom and ancient regulations,” the Patriarch also requested a delay
in the fact-finding mission. He admitted that he needed time to gather the
respectable faces (awjuh) of the people before the opinions of the ahali
were ascertained. The Patriarch conceded that several Christian notables
had already submitted or were about to submit petitions that opposed the
return of a Shihab ruler. These, he told Selim Bey, must be ignored; only a
Shihab emir must be in overall command. The other shaykhs should be
confirmed in their traditional prerogatives but not as rulers over Mount
Lebanon.37
The process of sectarianizing identity was immensely complex. New
sectarian fears and possibilities still had to contend with old-regime soli-
darities and geographies. Knowledge in prereform society had always been
deployed in the service of power, but it had been hegemonic knowledge.
The secular division between the söz sahibleri and the ahali, the rule of a
Shihab emir, the respect for social rank, and the total obedience to the Sul-
tan were the accepted bases of nonsectarian politics. They accommodated
religious and regional differences and gave expression to, as well as found
expression in, a genealogical geography of Mount Lebanon. For a sectarian
politics to cohere, for it to become hegemonic in a Gramscian sense, it
would have to become an expression of everyday life; it would have to


[PDF page 96]
78 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
stamp itself indelibly on geography and history. In this task, as with so
much else in this era of reform, the interplay between local and foreign
played an immeasurable role.
sectarianizing the landscape
The European and Ottoman characterization of “age-old” religious tur-
moil not only absolved the European powers and the Ottoman Empire of
any responsibility for the violence but reflected their ardent conviction
that they alone knew this region and that they alone could properly reform
it. The repeated Ottoman references to the zabt ü rabt, discipline which or-
ders and restrains, necessary for the good government of unruly Mount
Lebanon, were echoed in Lord Palmerston’s declaration before the House of
Commons in 1845 that “when such men are intermixed, as they are in
Lebanon, occupying the same village, dwelling on the same land, con-
stantly meeting in the same town, it evidently requires a vigorous hand, a
powerful head, a strong, determined will, together with sound judgement,
to repress the tendency to disorder which must exist in such a state of so-
ciety.”38 European and Ottoman concern for an allegedly native disorder
mandated a decisive effort to rebuild a sectarian orthodoxy where none
had previously existed.
Throughout 1842 the European ambassadors and Ottoman foreign
ministry officials and military commanders met and debated the issue of
communal violence. Throughout that year the fate of Mount Lebanon
hung in the balance. The Lebanese notables waited for word of the deci-
sions of the Great Powers and the Sublime Porte. In May and June, confer-
ences convened and adjourned, with the European powers and the Ot-
toman government unable to agree on the exact formulation of the new
sectarian order. The Europeans, led by Canning, urged the partition of
Mount Lebanon along religious lines. The Ottomans were opposed; they
insisted that the population was far too mixed for an effective partition.39
Canning, who had never visited Mount Lebanon, dismissed Ottoman con-
cerns for the “extraneous population”—that is to say the population who
marred the logic of partition by living in religiously mixed villages. When
the Ottomans again tabled proposals for direct Ottoman rule and rejected
partition on the basis that it would “prove to be a fresh element of disor-
der,” the exasperated European ambassadors implored them “to take a
more statesmanlike view of the question.”40 Meanwhile, Lord Aberdeen
urged Canning not to relent. “I have been informed that difficulties would
attend the execution of this plan, in consequence of the great intermixture


[PDF page 97]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 79
of the Druses and Maronites which might under their separate govern-
ment [be] scarcely practicable. This may certainly be the case in particular
districts, and some means must be devised to remedy the inconven-
ience.”41
Faced with an intransigent European position, Sarim Efendi, in a Sep-
tember meeting at his summer house which lasted more than six hours,
asked the assembled ambassadors if the “Powers have the intention of im-
posing their will on the Porte.” The French ambassador said no. Speaking
for all the ambassadors, he stated that they were only offering “advice”
and, in turn, wanted to know whether the Porte wanted to establish regu-
lar relations with “Europe.”42 Finally, on December 7, a beleaguered Sarim
Efendi conceded the point. The Sublime Porte accepted the idea that Mount
Lebanon would be formally divided; however, it added ominously that it
thought the plan was a recipe for disaster.43 So the ambassadors and a re-
luctant Ottoman government together made a fateful decision that created
a sectarian geography in Mount Lebanon. Like Salman Rushdie’s “mid-
night’s children,” Cebel-i Lübnan—a term that came into Ottoman usage
at precisely this time—was born to signify a new beginning for the region,
but also a tragic inheritance.
Ömer Pasha’s short tenure as governor came to an abrupt end. Mount
Lebanon was cut in half. The Northern district (nasara kaymakamlıg˘ı)
was meant to be a homogenous “Christian” area ruled by a Christian dis-
trict governor (kaymakam), and the southern district (dürzi kay-
makamlıg˘ı) was to be a distinctly “Druze” region ruled by a Druze district
governor. Ottoman officials estimated that the population of Mount
Lebanon was roughly two hundred thousand, of which the Druzes consti-
tuted forty thousand. With the exception of the Matn district, where many
Druzes resided, the vast majority of the inhabitants of the northern Chris-
tian district were Christian. The problem lay in the southern Druze dis-
trict, where the Christians also formed a majority, with the exception of
the Shuf, in which Dayr al-Qamar was located.44 The Maronite Church
continued to press for Maronite Christian rule over all of Mount Lebanon,
whereas Druze elites staunchly opposed handing over any power to Chris-
tian villagers. While they acknowledged that the Christian population had
increased over the years, Druze notables insisted that the villages were
built by their own ancestors and, hence, belonged to them. Two myths,
each distilled from a grain of truth, confronted each other: the first was the
Maronite Patriarch’s claim that tradition sanctioned “Christian” rule over
all of Mount Lebanon; the second was the Druze kaymakam’s claim that
tradition consisted of a benevolent patriarchy “because the notable consid-


[PDF page 98]
80 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
ers the inhabitants of his district as if they were his children, and [they, in
turn] consider the notable a father.”45
Such are the irrefutable facts that boldly present themselves: partition
was not a local decision, and the natives were not consulted but were de-
picted as savage mountaineers incapable of solving their own problems. To
this extent at least, what followed in Mount Lebanon over the next two
decades should be interpreted in light of the arrogance of imperial powers
who dismissed as an “inconvenience” centuries of native coexistence.46 It
is also clear that with partition the very notion of coexistence became a
vexing issue in a society increasingly defined along religious lines. The
logic of partition demanded the unambiguous classification of the local in-
habitants into one or another camp, either Christian or non-Christian. The
European-designed partition plan assumed that there were in fact two dis-
tinct and separate primordial tribes of Druzes and Maronites to which all
Druzes and all Maronites instinctively adhered. Leaving aside the fact that
Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholic communities resented being under
Maronite tutelage, the partition legitimated sectarian politics by organiz-
ing the administration and geography of Mount Lebanon along religious
lines.47
Although both Maronite and Druze elites were unhappy with the par-
tition decision (for it satisfied neither the Maronite demand for a return of
the Christian Shihab emirate nor the Druze claim that they were the orig-
inal proprietors of Mount Lebanon), the rival elites quickly adapted to the
fait accompli of partition. They still maintained their old-regime rank and
titles, and yet they were fully aware of the high stakes involved in acting
as leaders of separate nations. Whichever side could convince the European
powers and the Sublime Porte of the justice of its cause as a coherent com-
munity would win the bounty of land and control of the mixed villages.
Partition provided a new setting for a familiar story of elite rivalries, but it
changed the nature of the rivalry, the representation of the rivals, and the
definition of local communities. New categories of “Christian” or “Druze”
rule were created alongside the idea of “mixed” villages and “minorities.”
European consuls and missionaries involved themselves more than ever
before in the minutest details of everyday politics; at the same time, they
were actively sought out by local elites to mediate among them.
sectarian paths of development
Violence and partition cleared the way for sectarian paths of development.
Now that Mount Lebanon was geographically reformed, the fractious


[PDF page 99]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 81
elites, the Ottoman government, and the foreign missionaries began to
think of how to construct a modern society. The discourse of restoration
flowed into a discourse of progress. The question was no longer simply
how best to return to tradition but how to use knowledge of the past to
build a stable future. A number of quite different schemes were proposed,
all guided by the assumption of an untraversable difference that separated
Druze from Maronite and all consumed with the idea that religion was
the single most important political identification of each villager. Some
schemes, such as the Maronite Bishop Nicolas Murad’s 1844 tour of Eu-
rope as well as his polemical writing, represented a vision of a Christian-
dominated Mount Lebanon in which Druzes were included in a subordi-
nated position. Other schemes involved diplomatic efforts to build a
sectarian administration in an attempt to reconcile allegedly ancient dif-
ferences by creating a religiously balanced public sphere. Still others, such
as the Jesuit efforts to reform local Christianity, worked in precisely the
opposite direction, for they promoted segregated Christian spaces. The
upshot was that history, politics, and education—which in the old regime
had reinforced a nonsectarian hierarchical social order—were all put to
work to create a sectarian hierarchical social order. I want to draw atten-
tion here to the ambivalence of this process—to the novelty of these proj-
ects of reform, which tried to reorganize physical and cultural space in ac-
cordance with a sectarian vision of the past, and to the underlying tension
between the legacy of imperial sovereign time and the arrival of progres-
sive time. This ambivalence becomes particularly clear if the disparate
sectarian projects are analyzed side by side, that is to say, in and as mo-
ments of production rather than as coherent reflections of objective con-
ditions.48
Nowhere was this tension more manifest than in new local histories.
Unlike the old-regime chronicles, historical writings in the postreform era
displayed a variety of narrative forms and addressed foreign and domestic
audiences. They reflected both formal and informal subjecthood. Perhaps
not surprisingly, the period between 1840 and 1860 produced one of the
first teleological histories, Nicholas Murad’s Notice historique sur l’origine
de la nation Maronite et sur ses rapports avec la France, sur la nation
Druze et sur les diverses populations du Mont Liban, and the last of the
sweeping historical chronicles, Tannus al-Shidyaq’s Kitab akhbar al-a‘yan
fi Jabal
Lubnan.49
While Shidyaq’s history, which was first published in 1859, presented a
definitive history of the old regime—it was almost exclusively preoccu-
pied with the genealogy and history of the notable families of Mount


[PDF page 100]
82 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
Lebanon—the work of Maronite Bishop Murad represented a vision of a
new Christian regime.50 Murad himself in many ways embodied the tran-
sition from the old-regime politics of notability, in which he began his ca-
reer teaching the children of local notables, to an emerging sectarian order,
in which he became the most eloquent spokesman for a communal vision
of Mount Lebanon. Murad was a man comfortable both in an Ottoman and
in a European context. In a meeting with the Ottoman foreign minister, he
stressed Maronite obedience and loyalty to the Sublime Porte. To “Eu-
rope,” however, he appealed in the name of Christendom in his 1844 No-
tice historique. Murad’s Notice also heralded a significant rupture in both
its narrative form and its content. The Notice was a polemic that presented
a coherent sectarian vision of the history and future of Mount Lebanon;
written in French and addressed to Louis-Philippe, it interpreted the sec-
tarian violence as a Christian struggle for survival—a saga of the Maro-
nite ta’ifa as a nation that was attempting to take its rightful place along-
side the European Christian states. The Notice fused a European
nationalist idea with a tradition of Maronite ecclesiastical autonomy to
present the case for a Maronite-dominated Christian Lebanon.
Murad’s Lebanon, like that of the European travelers before him, was a
mountain refuge that had long held out against the Saracens and other in-
fidels as an “independent” Christian principality. After making the claim
of Maronite orthodoxy and unwavering devotion to Catholicism and em-
phasizing the Maronites’ anti-Jacobin counterrevolutionary credentials,
Murad recorded a history of Lebanon in which the Shihabs ranked first,
followed by other Christian notable families. The Druzes were left on the
margins of the narrative: Murad argued they were outsiders who had been
attracted to Christian Mount Lebanon and were given the title of shaykhs
because of services they had rendered to the Shihabs. Moreover, the
Druzes professed “idolatry,” and, even more, they signified the unmodern,
the “fanatical,” and the lazy: “The Druze is generally lazy and idle; the
only work that he engages in is plowing; all crafts [métiers] are unknown
to him. With the exception of very few individuals who have frequent or
intimate relations with Christians, the Druzes know neither reading nor
writing; they could not live without Christians, who to the contrary, are
familiar with all the professions exercised in Europe.”51
By creating this absolute distinction between Maronite and Druze and
by conveniently presenting the Maronites as the original possessors of the
land to which the Druzes were latecomers, Murad was not only legitimat-
ing the Maronite Church’s position on restoration but was also reworking
Maronite identity, casting it in imaginary national sectarian terms that to-


[PDF page 101]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 83
tally excluded the Druzes. Loyal to France and to the Crusaders, loyal to
the idea and existence of Christianity in the Orient, and on the front line
between Christendom and barbarism, Murad’s Maronites urgently needed
French assistance in the troubled postrestoration times. “Lebanon,” he
wrote, is “like another French land,” and France was the “seconde patrie
des Maronites.” 52 To add scientific evidence to his various arguments, Mu-
rad concluded his narrative with appendices that explain the “genealogy of
the [Christian] Princes of Lebanon” and that enumerated the different pop-
ulations of Mount Lebanon in which the Maronites, of course, constituted
the overwhelming majority.
Murad’s fabrications per se are not important; the implications sur-
rounding them are. The text was modern in that it framed Murad’s appeal
as part of a wider struggle of a modern, progressive, and united Christian-
ity against a barbarous Islam. But more than that, the narrative form of the
document, with its appendices and genealogies, ruled out any margin of er-
ror. The truths Murad presented were as stark and evident to his mind as
the existence of a pure and Catholic Maronite tradition. Moreover, he in-
terpreted the sectarian violence of the 1840s as part of a wider Muslim plot
to destroy Christianity in the Holy Land, and he perceived the Druzes as
the agents of this diabolical scheme. While he stressed the unbridgeable
temporal and sacred distance between the Maronites as modern Catholics
and the Druze as uncivilized “infidels,” Murad was at pains to portray the
Maronites as not just pro-French but actually French people living in a
specific territory known as the Mountain Refuge.53
Murad’s use of the term ahali signified the ambiguity in the parti-
tioned landscape. On the one hand, the term ahali retained its old-
regime connotation of belonging to the nonelite, and with its continued
use in this sense—for example, in Ottoman reports—the old-regime
social order was constantly reaffirmed. On the other hand, another,
more equivocal connotation of the term arose in which the ahali became
synonymous with the “people” of a nation. Thus, when Murad referred
to himself as the “general representative of the Christian people” or
when the Maronite Patriarch referred to the ahali, they were marking a
political boundary between Maronites and non-Maronites in addition to
a social boundary between notables and commoners. Yet for all its evo-
cation of a Maronite nation, Murad’s vision was not a populist one. It
was an elitist narration that claimed to speak for all Maronites. The idea
of community was no longer an elite one that crossed religious bound-
aries but one that was entirely subsumed within the religious commu-
nity. Yet like the söz sahibleri of the old regime, the representatives of


[PDF page 102]
84 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
the new sectarian vision were still elites. Murad’s goal was not to reform
the social order of Mount Lebanon but to stamp a Christian identity on
that order. Herein lies the central problem of his vision: how to reconcile
a communal vision of Mount Lebanon and maintain the old-regime so-
cial order.
This was precisely the task that the new Ottoman foreign minister,
S¸ ekib Efendi, gave himself when he was ordered to Mount Lebanon in
1845 to pacify the province following another bout of intercommunal vio-
lence. To a large extent, S¸ ekib Efendi personified the contradictions of the
Tanzimat, for he tried to reimpose absolute Ottoman sovereignty while
recognizing the limits of Ottoman power. He promoted an official Ot-
toman nationalism in an effort to contain sectarian mobilizations, but he
was unwilling to countenance any interpretation of the Tanzimat that gave
the local subjects an autonomous voice. In short, he was aware of the pres-
sure from Europe that motivated Ottoman reform, but he categorically re-
fused to accept that this pressure forced the Ottoman authorities to alter
their relationship to imperial subjects. Ottoman officials were willing to
concede that they should treat Maronites and Druzes equally (which, ef-
fectively, had been the case during the old regime), but they did not take
this to mean that they should relate to them differently: as center to pe-
riphery and as Ottoman to rural.
S¸ ekib Efendi’s vision of a new sectarian order, known as the Règlement
of S¸ ekib Efendi, was based on the notion of an “ancient” rivalry between
two distinct sides.54 Because he was convinced that the Druzes had been
oppressive “for a long time [kadimdenberu],” S¸ ekib Efendi felt that the
Christians of the mixed districts would never willingly accept the reimpo-
sition of Druze rule. In his judgment, the only solution short of a popula-
tion transfer, which he rejected, lay in the creation of an intricate system of
sectarian checks and balances. He reconfirmed the kaymakams in their re-
spective positions, but he created for each district an administrative coun-
cil which included a judge and an advisor for each of the Maronite, Druze,
Sunni, Greek Orthodox, and Greek Catholic sects.55 Although these coun-
cils encroached on the traditional autonomy of the muqata‘jis, S¸ ekib
Efendi nevertheless reconfirmed the notables in their responsibility to
maintain law and order.56 The Ottoman foreign minister stipulated that
wherever the notables and the population were of different “race” and
“sect,” a wakil, or representative of the same “race” of the population,
would be appointed to oversee the administration of the notable.57 When
two people of the same “race” and “sect” (hemcins ve hemmezheb) were
involved in a petty dispute and they were of the same sect as the notable,


[PDF page 103]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 85
then that notable would adjudicate; if they were of the wakil’s sect, then the
wakil would settle the dispute; however, if it was a mixed dispute, then the
wakil and the notable would work together, and if they couldn’t agree, then
they would submit it to their respective kaymakams of the same sect
(hemmillet). If they still couldn’t agree, then the Ottoman governor of the
Sayda would have the final word.58
Among S¸ ekib’s first acts was to summon both Druze and Maronite no-
tables to underscore the importance of the immediate restoration of tran-
quillity. Despite admonishing them for following the “path of vagabond-
age,” S¸ ekib reminded the local notables that they were “men of
intelligence [eshab-ı ukul]” and hence obligated to join together to restore
peace and security.59 S¸ ekib Efendi deployed the language of the Tan-
zimat— compatriotism and equality—to evoke the idea of belonging to a
single nation, but he also reminded the local notables that they had little
choice but to obey his commands. They must submit or be subjected “to all
kinds of affliction and harm and all kinds of punishment and retribu-
tion.”60
Such threats notwithstanding, a basic tension plagued S¸ ekib Efendi’s
proposal. Although he described the notables as compatriots in a common
land (vatandas¸lar), his regulations reinforced the idea of sectarian division
by creating parallel governments. The French consul Bourée noted this
contradiction when he confessed that the solutions proffered by the Sub-
lime Porte amounted to the “organization of civil war.”61 S¸ ekib Efendi
urged the notables to display their zeal for the nation, but he clipped their
wings by creating a massively complicated sectarian wakil system. He gave
the ahali hope of representation, but he insisted that wakils come “from
respectable households” and work toward preserving a social order in
which commoners again submitted to their traditional notables.62 S¸ ekib
Efendi hinted at the possibility of a free, equal, and modern Ottoman sub-
ject who was meant to have faith in, and owe loyalty to, an abstract Ot-
toman nation. Yet his belief in the primordial religious passions of the lo-
cal inhabitants and his own commitment to social hierarchy, in which all
members of the nation knew their proper place, ensured that they could
express their belonging to the Ottoman nation only as members of segre-
gated sectarian and social communities. As sincerely as he desired to “see
that Druzes and Maronites are treated equally,” he succeeded only in legit-
imating two separate sectarian political communities.63 Because S¸ ekib
Efendi conflated hemcins, hemmillet, and hemmezheb, he bolstered the
idea that religion and ethnicity were one and the same in Mount
Lebanon—unchangeable, irreducible, and therefore inevitably at the heart


[PDF page 104]
86 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
of any project of reform. And although S¸ ekib Efendi recognized the new-
ness of his own legislation, he developed it in accordance with his percep-
tion of a primitive sectarian landscape.
Emblematic of the tension between old and new that gnawed at the co-
herence of S¸ ekib Efendi’s vision was his decision to force the notables to
sign and accept a peace treaty based on the principle of mada ma mada, “to
let bygones be bygones.”64 This familiar rhetorical device discursively
abolished the memory of transgression and underscored the Ottoman de-
sire to restore an allegedly traditional status quo ante of political sectarian
harmony under benevolent Ottoman rule. It recalled the infallible imperial
domain of obedience outside the strictures of historical time, and yet it was
linked to a project steeped in the new language of the Tanzimat, of equal-
ity, progress, and reform. The elites were rehabilitated in the eyes of the
state, and the ahali were urged to tend to their traditional affairs of pro-
viding taxes and working the land under the uneasy control of their nota-
bles. With his work done, an exhausted but contented S¸ ekib Efendi re-
turned to Istanbul, leaving Mount Lebanon to sort out the contradictions
of his new sectarian order.
The truth of the matter was that the simple explanations offered by Ot-
toman statesmen for the communal troubles—their references to Euro-
pean plotting that encouraged a primitive conflict—masked complex real-
ities that undercut even their most sincere efforts at reform. Even as S¸ ekib
Efendi worked to enmesh sectarian identity within a series of overlapping
and mutually reinforcing administrative arrangements, the theoretical
framework of absolute Ottoman sovereignty and the concomitant notion
of total Ottoman power on which his entire system depended were being
steadily eroded. Not only were Ottoman officials plagued by a chronic fi-
nancial crisis that left soldiers’ payments in arrears for months on end, but
they were frustrated by the ability of the local inhabitants to circumvent
their authority.
An incident in October 1845 indicated the gray area of an emerging sec-
tarian politics that tested the boundaries of legitimacy and sovereignty in
Mount Lebanon. Ottoman soldiers arrived in the coastal town of Juniya in
the district of Kisrawan to disarm what they considered to be its violence-
prone ahali. At daybreak a few days later, they entered and cordoned off
the nearby towns of Zuq Mikayil and Zuq Musbah. The commanding offi-
cer, mirliva (major-general) Ibrahim, ordered all the villagers to assemble
and had the disarmament orders read out to the population. The troops be-
gan to search the village and to round up those who had not heard the
reading of the orders. By chance a major by the name of Has¸im Ag˘a came


[PDF page 105]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 87
across “a zimmi (dhimmi, non-Muslim) on horseback dressed in civilian
clothes.” When Has¸im Ag˘a ordered the Christian—who remains without
name in the document—to appear before mirliva Ibrahim, the Christian
“with violence and rudeness” refused and promptly escaped.65 Immedi-
ately thereafter, on another street an officer named Salih Ag˘a happened on
the same Christian and tried once more to “politely” summon the Chris-
tian to mirliva Ibrahim by calling out to him, “You there! Go listen to the
decree.” This time the Christian allegedly began to incite the people with
gestures of his hand, at which Salih Ag˘a ordered the Christian forcibly dis-
mounted and escorted him to the mirliva.66
When the Christian was brought before mirliva Ibrahim, he was asked
why he had not come to listen to the decree. “I am from Beirut,” he an-
swered with “rudeness and harshness [s¸iddet ve hus¸unet],” and again he
had the “fanciful” idea of escaping and began pushing his guards; the re-
port states that “to make an example of him for the others, a few lashes of
the whip were administered to him and he was thrown in prison.”67 Until
this point, the story recounts an encounter between representatives of the
Ottoman state and a local inhabitant who had violated the limits of old-
regime subjecthood. Not only did the term zimmi belong to a classification
of Ottoman subjects supposedly superseded by the Tanzimat, but the
forcible removal of the recalcitrant zimmi from his horse restored a sense
of Ottoman propriety and order.
However, much to the chagrin of the officer writing the report, this
wretched zimmi resisted the authority of the Ottoman state. When the
Christian was imprisoned by the Ottoman soldiers, he informed his sen-
tries that “I am the brother of the dragoman of the French consul” and
claimed to be a subject of the French state. The sentries reported this to the
mirliva, who summoned the prisoner and, with slightly more trepidation
than before, asked him why he was traveling in these parts. The Christian
“made it seem as if” he had come to buy some silk. The mirliva then asked
him “if it were not more appropriate for you to buy silk in Beirut, espe-
cially since everybody else knows that it was not permitted to come here at
this time, and thus your being here is very inappropriate.” The Christian
responded by saying only that “I am the brother of the French [consul’s]
dragoman and I can come and go here as I please and nobody can stand in
my way.”68
When the French consul was informed of this incident, he demanded
that the Christian be released at once; the Ottomans hesitated to comply,
and so the consul wasted little time in ordering one of the French frigates
off Beirut to proceed immediately to Juniya.69 The prisoner was duly re-


[PDF page 106]
88 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
leased to the “rude and shameless [edepsizlik eylemekleri]” French.70 The
tables were turned; the humiliated Ottoman officers were forced to ac-
knowledge that in sectarian Mount Lebanon, the old forms of coercion and
obedience could no longer be deployed without resistance—that they now
coexisted with new forms of authority and identity that emerged from the
interstices of local identity and international diplomacy. In an era domi-
nated by the European powers on cultural, economic, and military levels,
the channels of power flowed not just unilaterally from Istanbul but to and
from European capitals.
embracing “progress”
Perhaps the greatest symbol of the new sectarian climate was the consoli-
dation of the missionary movement in its “mountain refuge.” By their
own admission, foreign missionaries were well positioned to take advan-
tage of the political and military upheavals of the Egyptian occupation and
the subsequent era of reform.71 They presented their own sectarian vision
of Mount Lebanon, which entirely bypassed the political exigencies and
compromises that consumed S¸ ekib Efendi. Unarmed Jesuit and Protestant
missionaries possessed an enormous advantage over Ottoman officials, for
they were at the vanguard of a cultural movement that allowed for a two-
way exchange. They provided the elites with seemingly viable and modern
sectarian paths of development. They cultivated them as modern leaders
of their sectarian communities and offered them the support and protec-
tion of Europe.72 In return, the local elites protected and gave land to the
missionaries. The söz sahibleri encouraged the secular aspects of mission-
ary work, which in turn prompted the missionaries to persist in their ulti-
mate goal of reconstituting a Christian hierarchy amenable to spiritual re-
form.
Despite the fact that the missionaries incessantly complained of the
degradation and corruption of local Christianity and despite their constant
references to the imminent peril posed by Islam, Jesuit and American mis-
sionaries found themselves completely free to begin their task of “civiliza-
tion.” The Jesuits, for example, astutely took advantage of their friendly
relations with several Egyptian generals, and after the generals were ex-
pelled in 1840, the Jesuits capitalized on the prevailing Ottoman disinter-
est in rural Syria. As long as they did not proselytize among the Muslims
of Syria, they found their work unhampered.73 In Zahla, for example,
Planchet confessed from the outset of the mission that “for us, Europeans,
we live here in total independence of local government, and have complete


[PDF page 107]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 89
liberty to carry on with our sacred ministry, particularly in Mount
Lebanon, whose population is, in large part, Catholic.”74
The ability of the Jesuits and, indeed, all other missionaries to function
with such freedom was facilitated by their self-cultivated image as shep-
herds of secular modernity. As much as the Jesuits and the Protestants de-
nounced and competed with each other, they understood full well that they
shared common technologies over which they both claimed to be masters.
A Jesuit missionary, Edouard Billotet, complained in 1857 that the Jesuits
were losing ground to the Protestants in Sayda because “their science, their
polite manners and above all their charitable use of medicine are popular
with the Christians of this town. . . . We can force them out entirely if we
could present to the people a devoted and charitable doctor.”75 From the
outset of their mission, the Jesuits confessed that “we find in [medicine] an
easy, perhaps even unique, method to introduce ourselves to the Muslims
and the Druze.” Accordingly they spent several hours each day studying
basic medicine.76 The physician Henze was particularly valuable, and
many of the important Druze and Christian notables in the land called on
his services.77 Even the Maronite Patriarch asked the Jesuit missionary
Paul Riccadonna to intercede with Rome to send more men like Henze,
whose knowledge and power of healing were well appreciated.78
Certainly, the missionaries’ deployment of modern medicine was in-
tended to aid in the overall spiritual salvation of the local population. But
it was also undeniably an integral part of what James Axtell has likened to
an “invasion within.”79 The focus of the Jesuits, for example, was no
longer educating a few Lebanese in the Maronite College in Rome. The
purpose of the College had been largely achieved: it had successfully “re-
formed” the Maronite Church and had Latinized it to a large degree. In the
nineteenth century, the Jesuits’ goal was far more ambitious and far more
complex, for they aimed to “regenerate” an entire population primarily
through the medium of local education. At the same time as they fended
off Protestant encroachment on their terre sainte, the Jesuits did not want
to “denature” the native, to make him desire Europe so much that it would
alienate him linguistically and culturally. Instead they sought to reform
him sufficiently so that he would be content with life in the Orient. To that
end, schools and colleges had to be formed and maintained in the Orient.80
To both Protestant and Catholic missionaries, spiritual and temporal mod-
ernization were one and the same thing. In the eyes of priests like Ric-
cadonna and pastors like Henry Harris Jessup, the native lack of moral and
religious constitution was reflected in the status of local women and in the
absence of modern (Western) furniture, education, medicine, and knowl-


[PDF page 108]
90 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
edge.81 To remedy this deficiency, the missionaries unleashed, in their own
words, a cultural assault on the corrupt traditions of Mount Lebanon.
Although it is difficult to gauge the immediate results of the Jesuits and
the American missionaries in this regard, for the work was perforce gener-
ational, over the thirty-year period between 1830 and 1860, substantial
changes were effected. Forks and knives were introduced, print technology
increased, and the use of European and American furniture became more
widespread. William Benton, an American stationed in Bhamdun, reported
that “civilization enters [Lebanese] habitations in the form of chairs, ta-
bles, etc.”82 The most obvious sign of change, however, was the spread of
mission schools across Syria.83 As early as 1834, the Americans opened a
girls’ school; the Lazarists reopened ‘Ayntura in the same year and took
over several monasteries across Mount Lebanon, including one in Rayfun.
The Americans then set up a secondary school in ‘Abay in 1843, and three
years later the Jesuits established their famous seminary in Ghazir, on land
purchased from a Shihab emir.
Missionary schools were the most active sites of reform. Initially, the
education the Jesuit missionaries provided was ecclesiastical in nature or at
least heavily ecclesiastical in form, with religious services and sermons, re-
treats, and catechisms taking up large parts of the school day. The Ameri-
cans, too, at first directed an ecclesiastical assault on the local Christian
communities. They distributed tracts and polemics in a vain attempt to
convince the “nominal” Christians of Syria of their intellectual and spiri-
tual degradation. But the emirs and the elites sought a secular rather than
an ecclesiastical education, and neither Jesuits nor Protestants could ignore
this demand if they indeed desired to maintain a credible presence on the
land. The missionaries of the American Board of Commissioners for For-
eign Missions, therefore, abandoned their futile effort at open assault and
instead concentrated on opening schools that catered to native demand.84
Not to be outdone, the Jesuits reacted by admitting into their seminary in
Ghazir students whose parents wanted only an “education for the world.”
One Jesuit priest lamented that “we are faced with a fait accompli.”85
There is great irony, of course, in the fact that local desire for secular
modern knowledge (as opposed to ecclesiastical or evangelical knowledge)
was controlled largely by missionaries, and hence that knowledge was dis-
seminated along sectarian lines. In this respect, missionaries played as cru-
cial a part in sectarianizing the landscape of Mount Lebanon as did Euro-
pean and Ottoman diplomats and local elites. The bitter rivalry between
Protestant and Catholic missionaries played itself out across a shadow par-
tition of Mount Lebanon that presaged and then blossomed alongside the


[PDF page 109]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 91
formal partition of 1842. Early American polemics against the “papism”
and “ignorance” of the Maronite clergy heightened the clergy’s ecclesiasti-
cal consciousness, and the celebrated conversion of the Maronite As‘ad al-
Shidyaq (Tannus al-Shidyaq’s brother) to Protestantism in the late 1820s
prompted the Maronite Church to prohibit all contact with the Protes-
tants.86 Moreover, Jesuits aggressively staked their claims to the Catholic
inhabitants of the region, especially in and around Kisrawan, while Protes-
tant missionaries focused on the more heterogeneous Druze-dominated
Shuf.
Neither side explicitly acknowledged the hegemony of the other, and
yet a modus vivendi was established. The American missionaries came to
rely on the local protection of the Druze notables and the formal protection
of the British consul, while Druze notables understood that the American
missionaries were a conduit to British power. Indeed, the missionaries of
the American Board made little effort to dispel the notion among the
Druze notables that they were connected to imperial power. “[The Druzes]
appear to have the most entire confidence in our missionaries,” confided
Benton while stationed in the village of Bhamdun, “and say if they were
not Druzes they would be English Protestants. We are often confounded
with the English, and known as Americans, often do not attempt to disa-
buse the minds of these mountaineers of this mistake. Many of them have
no conception of geography.”87 The Jesuits, however, looked to the Maro-
nite authorities and French consulate for backing, and the Maronite Patri-
arch readily grasped the importance of the Jesuits as a connection to
Catholic Europe. Finally, in the absence of any Ottoman interest in the
general education of its rural subjects, Druze and Maronite elites turned to
the missionaries to provide a modern education for their children. Druzes,
by and large, sent their children to Protestant schools and accepted an im-
plicit orientation toward Britain, whereas Maronites embraced the Jesuit
schools and thereby committed themselves to an explicit orientation to-
ward France. Modern education did not stem from, and hence reinforce, a
religiously integrative social order but reflected, and gave credence to, a re-
ligiously segregated landscape.
Nowhere was the attempt to disengage from traditional society more
evident than in the Jesuit schools. Because missionaries like Riccadonna
and Louis Abougit believed that native Christians were corrupted by their
neighborliness with Muslim and Druze villagers, they envisioned pure
Christian spaces to be indispensable for reform. Riccadonna expressed his
revulsion at the intermingling of Muslim and Christian, at the Christians’
practice of adopting Muslim names, and at their habitual invocation of the


[PDF page 110]
92 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
prophet Muhammad, while Abougit was scandalized by what passed for
normal behavior in Sayda:
We are sorry to say that there was a sort of coexistence [fusion] between
the Christians and Muslims of Sayda. They visited each other fre-
quently, which resulted in intimate relations between them and which
introduced, bit by bit, a community of ideas and habits all of which was
at the expense of the Christians. These latter joined in the important
Muslim feasts, and the Muslims [in turn] joined in the Christian feasts;
this kind of activity passed for good manners, sociability, while in truth
it resulted in nothing more than the weakening of religious senti-
88
ments.
In seminaries like Ghazir the most invidious work of a new sectarian
outlook took its slow course. There native students became deeply involved
with the passions and experiences of Occidental Christianity and European
history. Jesuit priests sheltered them from their indigenous surroundings
and inculcated in them the order of counterrevolutionary modernity. The
students were taught to respect Catholic France and, implicitly, to disdain
their immediate surroundings. They were made to submit to a new hierar-
chy that began not in the rural village but in the Jesuit school and that
ended not with the Sultan in Istanbul but with the Pope in Rome.
From their enclaves of “pure” Occidental Christianity, the Jesuits pene-
trated the home and the family. In 1859, a Jesuit priest who accompanied
several French noblemen to Ghazir reported, much to his satisfaction, that
the students were well advanced in the gentle crusade. At the entrance to
the village, the students of the college received him and his traveling com-
panions with cries “a thousand times repeated” of “Long live the French
pilgrims!” Astonished by this reception, the visitors were moved by the
melange of students, of Greeks, Maronites, Arabs, and Armenians, united
“in a single thought of love for those whom they hailed as the representa-
tives of France.”89
Later at dinner, the students several times toasted the honor of France,
and afterward the visitors were regaled by the sounds of civilized native
tongues that expounded on a “new order of things.” Several of the bright-
est students took turns explaining to the visitors the history of the school,
the curriculum, and the goals of a “modern” education. They began by ex-
plaining the importance of situating a school in the Orient and not in Eu-
rope, for, as one of the students explained with pride, “With God’s help,
you will give us the science and the piety of the clergy of Europe. You will
initiate us into civilization, enough to enhance the influence of our min-


[PDF page 111]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 93
istry before our compatriots, but not enough to make us abandon the sim-
ple patriarchal life of our country. Salut, Ghazir, haven of our youth! . . .
Salut, brilliant aurora, precursor of more beautiful days. Salut!” Then an-
other student rose and described how the notion of progress had been in-
culcated into the student body, how Europe had been represented, and how
“debased” the stagnant Orient would remain without European aid and
civilization. Even the Muslims would have to bow before the imperatives
of time and modernity, as “their contact with the civilized peoples inspires
amongst many of them a desire for progress which raises them to the level
of European nations.” New linear notions of time had not only been taught
to the students but had been imbibed by them. After a break for refresh-
ments, served by the “Arab” students, the visitors were once more enter-
tained. With the “terror” of 1848 behind them, explained a third student,
the Jesuits courted the elites of the country, whose sons would one day be
called to rule, and provided them with what they desired, an education for
a changing world. Finally, a student from the notable Maronite Hubaysh
family summed up the moral of the story, extolling the virtues of France:
“Thanks to your influence, thanks to the noble zeal of French hearts, the
seminary at Ghazir will live. The tree of faith, that of civilization, will grow
in our land scorched by the sun of Asia; the Greek, Armenian, Maronite
and Syrian nations will rest in the shade of its branches, and the leaders
and old men of the country, the object of your solicitude, will recount to
the new generations the kindness of France.”90
These products of a Jesuit education reflected with pride on their sense
of accomplishment. While they had once been merely the sons of powerful
families, they were now “civilized” sons of powerful families. From now
on, the reality of the “new order of things” was stamped on their young
minds. Without France, there was aridity. Without some level of (but not
too much) “civilization,” there was sterility. Without the Jesuit fathers,
there was an emptiness, a void that could no longer be filled by the sud-
denly small, suddenly uncivilized traditions and customs of their culture.
Best of all, the students informed their illustrious visitors that although
Ghazir had once boasted a mosque, now it had vanished—“stones and
Muslims, have altogether disappeared.”91 Jesuit Ghazir exemplified how a
notion of historical progress embedded itself within a reworked sense of a
sectarian community. In Ghazir an understanding of an organic past that
nurtured the present was abandoned wholesale; the barrenness of local tra-
ditions was accepted as fact by the students. By severing themselves com-
pletely from their indigenous past, by making it foreign, and by embracing
the Jesuits as community, Riccadonna’s Maronite disciples willingly subor-


[PDF page 112]
94 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
dinated themselves to a sectarian modernity. They adopted Jesuit manners
and language, most often French but also Italian; they believed that their
tie to Catholic Europe was umbilical; and they exhibited a newly instilled
fear of and a willingness to be segregated from their Islamic surroundings.
segregated communities
No single elite group sectarianized Mount Lebanon, but each contributed
to the dismantling of the moral and material foundations of the old regime.
Under the historical, geographical, and cultural recasting of Mount
Lebanon as a quintessentially sectarian land lay an unresolved crisis. The
traditional elite community of knowledge that had bound chroniclers,
clergy, and notables of different faiths together in a nonsectarian politics
during the old regime had disintegrated under the pressures of reform and
was in the process of being reconstituted as separate sectarian communities
of knowledge. The entrance of Europeans as players in elite politics; rival
Druze and Maronite interpretations of the meaning of legitimacy, tradi-
tion, and reform; and missionary encroachment dramatically altered the
relationship among religion, knowledge, and power. Whereas religion had
once been an integral part of an elaborate nonsectarian social order de-
pendent on a notion of absolute and everlasting Ottoman sovereignty, it
now constituted the basis and raison d’être for communal segregation in an
era of profound change. Paralleling the two geographical districts that di-
vided Mount Lebanon were opposing Druze and Maronite reflections of a
putative past—and what morals and lessons should be drawn from it—
and mutually exclusive visions of a sectarian future. Reform had come to
Mount Lebanon Janus-faced. One side looked backward to survey the al-
legedly primordial scene, while the other side looked forward to shape a di-
verse land into a tragic place of atavistic hatreds and primordial religious
solidarities.
There were some notable victories for sectarian modernity. By 1860, for
example, Riccadonna believed he had made local Christians worthy again
of that name, for he had stopped (some) Christians from singing “Muslim”
songs.92 By 1860, missionaries had done much to transform previously
“unrecognizable” Christian women into discernibly “modest” Chris-
tians.93 Father François Badour had even noted in 1855 that new Catholics
were being born in the Levant, at once loyal to France and able to withstand
the “pernicious influences of the community of infidels with whom they
are mixed.”94 But from other vantage points anxieties snapped at the heels
of these victories. The breakdown of the old regime had opened a Pandora’s


[PDF page 113]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 95
box of possibilities regarding the political and social makeup of each com-
munity. Rival elites—the Maronite Church, secular Christian and Druze
notables, Jesuits, European and Ottoman officials—struggled to impose
their respective visions of a sectarian Mount Lebanon. They tried to pre-
serve the social hierarchy of the old regime while they undermined its ma-
terial and metaphorical foundations. They insisted that their religious
communities were autonomous political and cultural nations and not sim-
ply communities of faith integrated into a complex intrareligious polity.
Never for a moment did the disparate elites contemplate the full rami-
fications of reconfiguring each ta’ifa as a nation. Their grim determina-
tion not to relinquish any power and their successful efforts to block
cadastral reform in the late 1840s notwithstanding, at times it seemed that
notables like Khattar al-‘Imad, whom we came across earlier in this chap-
ter, were beginning to make out a terrible apparition largely of their own
making.95 As we shall see in the next chapter, one unintended result of the
elite debate over reform was the theoretical possibility of a subaltern ahali
who would forcibly stake out a role in politics and claim a place in a sec-
tarian landscape. Fear and rejection of this possibility increasingly bur-
dened and complicated elite narratives and rivalries up to and including
1860. The rupture in the cohesiveness of the traditional politics of nota-
bility and the introduction of communally articulated reform muddled the
status of the ahali. ‘Imad’s supplication to the Ottoman government
summed up the conundrum. He claimed the Christian villagers in his dis-
trict “were once our miserable and wretched subjects.” Left hanging, how-
ever, was a palpable concern. What were they to become now? In other
words, what was the place of the ahali in an emerging sectarian world?
How was the Ottoman government to reconcile its secular intent with the
renewed emphasis in Mount Lebanon on sectarian affiliations? And did
the Tanzimat imply social as well as religious equality? Precisely because
no single party had a monopoly on interpretation in the era of reform,
there was no way of answering these questions categorically or uniformly.
In a period of dominance without hegemony, to borrow Ranajit Guha’s
formulation, the door was unwittingly left open for the uncontrolled en-
trance of the ahali onto the sectarian political stage.96 And as we shall
presently see, there was a commoner daring enough to walk through it.
The rise of Tanyus Shahin embodied a popular sectarian invasion of what
had once been the strictly elite realm of politics. This muleteer from Ray-
fun represented the most radical attempt to redefine the relationship be-
tween power and knowledge in the history of Mount Lebanon. In so doing,
he unleashed a sustained terror among the elites.


[PDF page 114]
6 The Return of the Juhhal
We beg to remind you that to support or abandon us is supporting
or abandoning all the Christians in the Lebanon, not because we
are of so much importance in the world but because when the
disorderly in the mountain [see] that crimes such as those
committed by the people of our district pass unpunished the
disorders [extend] to most of the mountains.
Memorial from the Khazin shaykhs to British Consul
Noel Moore, 25 December 1859 (FO 78/1454)
A
crisis of communal representation unfolded in Mount Lebanon. This
crisis originated in the tumult of the restoration period but came to the
fore most dramatically during a popular revolt in the predominantly Mar-
onite district of Kisrawan in 1858 and in the Druze-Maronite war of 1860.
At stake, as the above plea of the Maronite Khazin shaykhs to the British
consul-general illustrates, was a struggle over the meaning of community
and geography in the postpartition world. It was a struggle epitomized by
the social unrest that invaded and undermined elite politics. For while Ot-
tomans, Europeans, and local Druze and Maronite leaders engaged in ne-
gotiations premised on the idea of an age-old sectarian reality and on im-
mutable sectarian identities, while Jesuit missionaries persisted in their
gentle crusade and S¸ ekib Efendi’s unwieldy regulations sought to reconsti-
tute an elite sectarian social order, a movement was afoot in the villages of
Kisrawan that forced open the closed circle of Ottoman politics.
In 1858 common Maronite villagers took advantage of a debilitating
feud between Maronite notables to press for a reform of the social order.
The insurgents were galvanized by the Tanzimat, the ample amounts of
weaponry available since the 1840s, a climate of economic hardship, and
scarcity of land.1 Their initial grievances were formulated against what
they claimed were the excessive and unjust taxes and humiliating gifts
they were traditionally compelled to present to the Khazin shaykhs. In De-
cember of 1858, a muleteer from Rayfun by the name of Tanyus Shahin
took over the leadership of the rebellion. Under his direction, the revolt es-
calated despite Maronite Church efforts to mediate between shaykhs and
commoners. Villagers demanded equality with the shaykhs and formal
96


[PDF page 115]
The Return of the Juhhal / 97
representation. They took the unprecedented action of evicting the Khazin
notables from their homes and from the district that had in bygone years
“belonged” to them.2 Shahin’s popularity spread to neighboring districts as
he presented himself and was perceived as a savior of the common Chris-
tian inhabitants of Mount Lebanon, especially after a Druze-Maronite
clash in August 1859 in the village of Bayt Miri. By 1860, Shahin was in de
facto control of most of Kisrawan, defying Ottoman efforts to silence him.
Rebellions, of course, had occurred in the past and were a feature of the
political landscape of nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon. But these
events were different, not so much because of their scope but because of
their location and timing. Not only was the Kisrawan uprising played out
in an almost exclusively Maronite district—and hence contrary to the
logic of partition—but it occurred after the promulgation of the second
major reform decree of the Tanzimat, the 1856 Hatt-i Hümayun.3 The
rebel villagers consistently justified their actions by referring to the Tan-
zimat; they drew in equal measure on notions of imperial reform as well
as on a discourse of just and unjust traditions. As a result, the Kisrawan
uprising represented a fundamental crisis in local and Ottoman identity. It
explicitly challenged elite conceptions of a quietist Maronite identity in
postrestoration Mount Lebanon, and, implicitly, it raised vital questions
about the meaning of modern post-Tanzimat Ottoman subjecthood. The
movement in Kisrawan exploited the open-ended nature of sectarian poli-
tics, which could not be contained within the closed narratives produced
about it— either textually as in the case of Bishop Nicolas Murad’s Notice
historique or legally through S¸ ekib Efendi’s double kaymakamate system.
Shahin and his followers imposed a popular Christian reading on what
was traditionally a genealogical geography; they asserted new rights of
freedom and equality, and, above all, they represented themselves rather
than allowed themselves to be represented.4 This will to knowledge on the
part of the Christian juhhal—the “ignorants,” which is the epithet the
elites bestowed on them for their insubordination—indicated a world en-
veloped in momentous change, when order was no longer defined in terms
of master and slave, when hierarchy was violated, and when the members
of the ahali deliberately and autonomously sought to carve out their own
place in the modern world and to enter the realm of traditionally elite pol-
itics.5
This chapter tells the story of the most sustained popular mobilization
in nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon, recognizing from the outset that it
is implicated in another tale of the unfolding of the Tanzimat. I begin with
a discussion of a crisis in local representation that was sparked by the revolt


[PDF page 116]
98 / The Return of the Juhhal
by examining rebel demands and the Khazin reaction to the rebellion.
Then I elaborate on the implications of Shahin’s movement for modern Ot-
toman subjecthood (and citizenship) by analyzing Ottoman responses to
the rebellion. My main purpose is to depict what I see as the overlapping
social and religious layers and the limits inherent in modern sectarian
identity.
the crisis in local representation
While Murad was musing over the essential characteristics of the Maro-
nite “nation,” in Kisrawan—heartland of the Maronites of Mount
Lebanon—the very notion of who could speak for the Maronites was sub-
ject to an intense struggle between the Khazins, who insisted that they
ruled and thus represented Kisrawan, and Shahin and his followers, who
presented the justness of their cause in terms of popular and general inter-
ests and rights in Kisrawan. The sheer audacity of the rebellious ahali of
Kisrawan both in their rebellion against their notables in 1858 and in the
expulsion of the majority of the Khazin family in January of 1859, esti-
mated by several sources to number several hundred individuals, reverber-
ated across the elite community of Mount Lebanon.6 Never before had the
commoners acted with such decided “ignorance”; never before had a no-
table family been uprooted by the ahali. The uprising came on the heels of
a simmering dispute between the Christian kaymakam Bashir Ahmad
(from the Abilam‘ family) and several of the Khazin notables because they
refused to recognize his authority over them in the Kisrawan. In addition,
the situation was complicated by intense rivalries between various
branches of the Khazin family, rivalries that were finally resolved in De-
cember of 1858, when the family “united” in the face of the threat from
the juhhal.7 At first, each notable faction assumed that the other was incit-
ing the ahali to harass it; indeed, it seemed to be yet another episode of the
familiar tale of elite rivalries, in which each side mobilized its men and
reined them in or let them loose depending on the circumstances.
Far from being an organized and centrally directed rebellion run by the
bishops to weaken the power of the secular notability, the resistance to
Khazin domination took a more local and sporadic form. The epicenter of
the revolt was five villages in southern Kisrawan: Rayfun (Shahin’s own
village), ‘Ajaltun, ‘Ashqut, al-Qlay‘at, and Mazra‘at Kfar Dabyan. The rep-
resentatives of these villages tried to rally, through civil and coercive
means alike, recalcitrant villages to an imagined community of villagers
united in voice and deed. Other villages, however, such as ‘Aramun, hesi-


[PDF page 117]
The Return of the Juhhal / 99
tated or simply refused to join the Kisrawan uprising. Ghazir, stronghold
of the Hubaysh notable family, condemned the attacks on one of their
shaykhs by insisting that “crimes against the shaykh is not only directed
against him but against all of Ghazir.”8 The village notables in Ftuh as-
sured their Dahdah shaykhs that they were completely against Tanyus
Shahin’s call for a general uprising.9 Places like Ghusta remained staunchly
pro-Khazin, a state of affairs denounced by Shahin, who remarked in a let-
ter to the ahali of Zuq Mikayil that “from the beginning of the haraka
[movement] no result has come from Ghusta.”10 Unquestionably some re-
gions participated more actively in the rebellion than others. By the mid-
dle of 1859, Tanyus Shahin enjoyed de facto control over most of Kisrawan
and was addressed by rebel partisans as the “general representative of all
Kisrawan.”11
In most cases reported by the Khazins, either their trees were cut down
or their harvests were appropriated or their homes were looted. Apart
from the mass expulsion in January 1859, beatings of Khazin and other
notables seemed to occur at random intervals. A Hubaysh shaykh was in
his house in a village near Ghazir in May of 1860 when several men at-
tacked him; he fled, but the rebels stole his gun and went about “from
place to place” cursing and threatening the notable’s sharecroppers. A Dah-
dah shaykh was beaten and cursed on his way to Ghazir in the same
month, and he was lucky to escape with some of his clothing intact.12 The
wife of Khalil Khazin was often prevented from moving about freely and
was insulted when she did, according to a report from January of 1860.13
The only confirmed deaths that occurred in the revolt took place at ‘Ajal-
tun on the evening of 13 July 1859 in murky circumstances. There, the
wife and daughter of a Khazin shaykh were killed in their house. Their
murderers were never found, but the Patriarch was appalled by the “hor-
rific crime.”14
These and other assaults occurred throughout 1859 and 1860. The only
common strand was that attacks were generally quick affairs, in which vil-
lagers took advantage of the relative weakness or absence of the notables;
the point was to act under cover of night or through the collective anger of
an “ignorant” mob, and then to deny any involvement.15 Because the in-
surgent villagers could never be certain when the shaykhs would return,
houses were not occupied but were looted. The booty was, in some cases at
least, taken to Shahin’s own house “by virtue of the authority of the popu-
lace” and from there distributed to his followers.16 Fields were used by
shepherds to graze their flocks, and orchards stood unattended. One
Khazin shaykh bitterly complained to the Patriarch that anybody could


[PDF page 118]
100 / The Return of the Juhhal
“come and pick the berries and leaves as he pleased” and that his silk fac-
tory had been stripped to its very boards.17 Another Khazin shaykh, sur-
veying his ruined domain following the uprising, penned a long list of the
items stolen: silver objects and valuables such as crystal and porcelain as
well as hunting paraphernalia, local and European gunpowder, pistols, and
a game bag. Also carried off were his pipe, harnesses, a coffee grinder and
roaster, various silks and grains, and his great bed. His house was even
stripped of its doors; all that could not be carried away was broken.18
When the Patriarch insisted that the ahali return the bounties of stolen
harvests, the ahali simply denied taking anything and stated repeatedly that
the shaykhs were welcome to return to their homes.19 Similarly, villagers
denied to an Ottoman commission of inquiry sent to investigate the distur-
bances in Kisrawan all knowledge of the murderers and any involvement in
the plunder of the shaykhs’ houses. They claimed that neither the shaykhs
nor the government had appointed the ahali to watch over the houses. Be-
sides, they asserted that to the best of their knowledge the shaykhs had
cleaned out their homes before they left. As for stolen harvests, the ahali in-
sisted that the Khazins had taken a share of them. and the rest was with the
sharecroppers who had outstanding accounts with their notables. So the
government officials went from village to village across the Kisrawan. In all
they received the same answers—no knowledge of the murderers, plun-
dered goods, or stolen harvests.20 In another letter to the Patriarch in Janu-
ary of 1860, the insurgents again denied that they were rebels, adding only
that they demanded the rule of law as stipulated by the Tanzimat but that,
given the circumstances of their dispute with the Khazins, it was to be ex-
pected that “some indecencies” might occur at the behest of the “jahala.”
Ignorance, both in the sense of submitting to the wisdom of government (as
well as the Maronite Patriarch and the French consul) and in the sense of
manipulating a well-established trope of the “ignorant” commoner, pro-
vided a convenient cover for insubordinate villagers to ignore the govern-
ment’s intrusive questioning. The Khazins remained frustrated in their at-
tempts to restore the old regime.21
If the actions of some of the ahali were thus more sporadic than
planned, the demands they put forward on several occasions indicated that
they had in mind more than just looting.22 In one petition submitted to the
Maronite Church, rebel villagers insisted that the Khazins indemnify them
for all the costs incurred during the rebellion. They called for an abolition
of all “gifts” required of the ahali.23 In another list of demands, villagers
pressed for an end to the marriage taxes levied by the Khazins, the beating
of the ahali, and the practice of passing the taxes due from the shaykhs on


[PDF page 119]
The Return of the Juhhal / 101
to the ahali. They also called for compensation for all taxes that had been
thus extorted from the ahali as well as for an end to the encroachment on
the “common grazing lands” in the Jurud of Kisrawan. They also asked for
compensation for money taken for a cadastral survey that was never car-
ried out and for the disbursement of money promised but never delivered
to the “army of ahali Kisrawan” during the 1840 war against the Egyp-
tians.24
The villagers made repeated references to the idea of representation, so-
cial equality, and the Tanzimat. Representation was, of course, central to
S¸ ekib Efendi’s regulations, but it had not been introduced in Kisrawan be-
cause it was not a “mixed” district. According to one petition submitted for
the Church’s arbitration, the ahali of some rebel villages asked that dis-
putes between the ahali and the Khazins henceforth be settled by two wak-
ils, one elected by the Khazins and the other by the ahali. They subse-
quently demanded, however, that “the station [manzalat] of the shaykhs
be [equal] to ours without exception” and added that “nobody from the
shaykhs will be an official over us.”25 Rebels from other villages asked for
wakils “to defend the rights of the poor ahali who were not capable of de-
fending themselves.”26
Such evidence suggests that rebel villagers not only were willing to in-
voke tradition and the Tanzimat interchangeably but were quite able to in-
terpret them in accordance with their own goals. S¸ ekib Efendi had never
countenanced a wakil system that was an integral part of an essentially
popular rule, and he certainly would never have accepted Tanyus Shahin’s
election as general representative of Kisrawan or the appointment of wak-
ils by each of the rebel villages. Nor had the Tanzimat statesmen ever in-
tended to make all subjects of the empire socially equal. But that is pre-
cisely what the rebels demanded; in one petition they reminded the
Patriarch that the Tanzimat had stipulated “general equality and total
freedom” and had abolished “distinctions and disdain in the forms of ad-
dress.”27 Not only had the material foundations of the old regime been dis-
rupted by the rebels’ refusal to tolerate what they considered to be unjust
taxes and customs, but the ideological and symbolic bases of traditional so-
ciety had also been undermined by the rebels’ eviction of the Khazins from
their properties. The French consul, to give another example, was aghast at
the reports he received that at some of their “riots” the rebels had hoisted
French flags to indicate the support they believed they enjoyed from the
French consul.28 As far back as 1657, the name of France had been symbol-
ically associated with the Khazin family, who had served France as consuls
until just before the French Revolution. Shahin— or some of his followers


[PDF page 120]
102 / The Return of the Juhhal
who hoisted French flags—apparently understood this and in unfurling
the French flag not only invoked a spurious French support but implicitly
challenged the Khazins’ historical connection to France.
Implacably opposed to such ideas, of course, stood the Khazins, who
consistently referred to the rebellion as an “excitement” rather than as a
rational movement. To them rights meant “keeping property in the hands
of its owner.”29 Although at the outset of the rebellion in 1858 the Khazins
reacted slowly and were divided among themselves, they quickly formu-
lated as their basic demand the return of their “usurped” property.30 Their
increasingly wretched condition, their mounting debts while exiled from
their lands, and their inability to force the ahali into submission did not
shake their belief that they had been cheated and robbed of their
birthright. The property was theirs after all; their function as tax collectors
had been reaffirmed by S¸ ekib’s regulations. The right to property—and
with it the confirmation of social hierarchy—was far more important to
them than the nebulous Tanzimat right to equity of treatment; to be fair,
nothing in the history of the past few decades had indicated to them that
their stand against the juhhal was not the one sanctioned by the Great
Powers or the Ottoman government. For the Khazins as well as the Maro-
nite Church, the defiance of the ahali had to be the result of an ignorance
manipulated by a few conspirators. Such places as Rayfun and ‘Ajaltun,
villages which had “belonged” to them as far back as any could remember,
seemed to the Khazins to be the center of the “excitement” of the ignorant
ahali, who refused to recognize the limits sanctioned by tradition, history,
and law.
The Khazins reasoned that the ahali acted out of their juhl, or igno-
rance. This ignorance was, in their opinion, being manipulated by some
more important force, something or someone who was perched higher on
the social hierarchy. Some of the Khazins blamed the Maronite bishops,
for it was reported to the Maronite Patriarch that the Khazins believed that
“the ahali don’t do anything without your order.”31 The Patriarch received
a report that Qa‘dan Bek Khazin had told an assembly of Druze and Chris-
tian notables in the fall of 1859 that the revolt came not from the ahali but
at the instigation of the Patriarch and the Maronite bishop of Beirut,
Tubiyya ‘Awn. The report added that Qa‘dan Bek insisted that, had he not
been restrained by his relatives, he would have “split open the brains of the
Patriarch.” Had he been allowed to do so, he continued, “we would have all
been spared these actions [by the ahali].”32 Although several of the Khazin
shaykhs swore that they had never blamed the Patriarch and that any dec-
larations to that effect with their seals on them were forgeries, the inabil-


[PDF page 121]
The Return of the Juhhal / 103
ity of the Khazins to accept the autonomy of popular mobilization was in-
dicated by their search for conspirators of “[evil] intentions.”33 The confu-
sion was compounded because the rebels often invoked the name of the Pa-
triarch to justify their actions.
For the Maronite Church, the Kisrawan revolt could not have come at a
more awkward moment. In 1858, Patriarch Bulus Mas‘ad had convened a
Maronite council at Bkirke in an effort to lay the moral, spiritual, and ed-
ucational basis for a modern Maronite clergy and community.34 Therefore,
as the Church was positioning itself as the sole representative of the Mar-
onite “nation”—as it was deliberately cultivating a self-consciously mod-
ern image—it was paralyzed by a popular movement that, according to an
advisor to the Patriarch, threatened the ta’ifa with “destruction.”35 The
Patriarch’s role as a spiritual guide and as a moral arbitrator in the troubled
times of the mid-nineteenth century was inherently compromised by the
fact that the Maronite Church was among the largest landowners in
Mount Lebanon and was therefore committed to the inviolability of prop-
erty. As an institution, it was also a staunch supporter of social hierarchy,
and in no manner did it condone the individual activities of some village
clergy who actively participated in the uprising.36 Not only were several
Khazins members of the Church establishment, but the movement of the
juhhal threatened to weaken the “common cause” of the Christians. The
Patriarch repeatedly exhorted the ahali, as he did in a letter to the (Maro-
nite) ahali of Baskinta in May of 1860, “to adhere to the spirit of peace and
tranquility, to avoid all contrary causes, and to remain in the good graces of
the emirs [fi khatir al-umara’].”37 At the same time, the Maronite Patri-
arch worked to end the rebellion by addressing at least some of the princi-
pal rebel demands. For instance, an undated draft reconciliation found in
the Patriarchal papers proposed that each village was to have its own wak-
ils elected by the ahali. It stated that the shaykhs were not to have the right
to “compel, insult or beat” any of the ahali; if they did, the incident would
have to be investigated in accordance with the imperial reform edicts.
Moreover, “just as the ahali were asked to respect the dignity of the
shaykhs and to show them the respect emanating from their standing,” it
was also asked of the shaykhs to respect the rights of the ahali, to abolish
the old humiliations, both those in writing and in greeting, and to stop ad-
dressing any of the respectable ahali as a fellah, or peasant.38
While all sides referred to the Patriarch as the ultimate recourse for set-
tling disputes, several competing visions of the rights he was meant to pro-
tect emerged. Shahin and the ahali urged him to remain faithful to the ma-
jority of his flock—at one point even firing shots toward Bkirke, where


[PDF page 122]
104 / The Return of the Juhhal
some Khazin notables took refuge. The Khazins urged the Patriarch to re-
main constant to his duties toward a family that had long supported the
Maronite Church. His bishops pleaded with him to take a firm stand to
unite the Maronites. But the Patriarch hesitated, unable to control the sit-
uation on the ground and the pace of events. He always urged “calm” but
was unable to bridge the contradiction between the old-regime social or-
der, on the one hand, and the Tanzimat discourse of rights and a commu-
nal identity on the other.
At stake in Kisrawan was more than a simple physical struggle over
control of land. There was a contest to redefine the term ahali, a well-em-
bedded trope in old-regime chronicles. A single, undifferentiated category
of the ahali was, after all, a construction of old-regime chronicles; it was a
source of legitimacy for those rulers who guaranteed the tranquillity of the
common people and who maintained a stable social order. For the Khazins,
the Maronite Church, and the Ottoman state, therefore, the term ahali
implied the ideal of a politically quiescent population; it intimated a passive
community whose legitimate and lawful needs (about which there was no
consensus) were represented by others. They deployed the trope of the
passive and obedient ahali primarily to isolate and delegitimize the rebels,
whom they accused of being at the forefront of a conspiracy whose goal
was to overturn the order of things and to instigate the innate “ignorance”
of the commoner class. At the most basic level, this accusation reflected
elite unease in the face of a genuinely popular movement, an inability to
comprehend that the meaning of ahali was itself bound to change follow-
ing the Tanzimat, and a refusal to accept the idea that commoners had a
stake in the making and interpretation of history or that they could partic-
ipate in rational rule or government. The Khazin shaykhs explained to the
sympathetic British consul-general that, as a rule, “when a people, who are
by nature inclined toward sedition, desire to be given free rein in every vil-
lage or place [and] are permitted [such freedom], they are [inevitably go-
ing to] commit terrible crimes.”39 Shahin, appropriating the mantle of re-
form, pushed for an alternative understanding of the ahali. For Shahin and
the rebels under his command, the term ahali signified an active, unified,
discerning, and mobilized population willing and able to legitimately rep-
resent itself. Shahin often signed documents as a “general representative”
(wakil ‘am) of the ahali of Kisrawan. Many petitions forwarded by the
rebels to the Patriarch were often simply signed by “ahali Kisrawan.”
When Shahin was called on by the Patriarch to settle the dispute with the
Khazins in March of 1859, he replied that “we cannot accept anything un-
til we consult with all the ahali and all the villages.”40 In another letter to


[PDF page 123]
The Return of the Juhhal / 105
a priest, Shahin replied that he was bound to “the interest of the masses
[maslahat al-jumhur].”41 That many villages refused to join the rebel-
lion—that Ghazir, Ghusta and the villages of Ftuh remained staunchly
loyal to their shaykhs— did not deflect from the fact that a subaltern
movement now claimed to speak for all and, in so doing, impinged on the
coherence of an elite Maronite identity peddled by Bishop Murad in front
of the European powers. That there was a movement at all, that Maronite
villages organized, delegated representatives, set up tribunals, evicted
landlords, distributed harvests and provisions all in the name of the com-
mon people and without direction from the Maronite Church, was crisis
enough.
the crisis in ottoman representation
The inter-Maronite battle in Kisrawan not only eroded the coherence of
sectarian narratives proposed by the various elites but also reflected a
struggle to define the contours of the Tanzimat in Mount Lebanon. The re-
volt had important implications for the definition of modern Ottoman sub-
jecthood because both the Khazins and Shahin insisted that they were loyal
Ottoman servants interested in promoting rights guaranteed them by the
Tanzimat. Shahin underscored a crisis in Ottoman representation because
he linked religion and reform in a manner that turned an imperial project
of reform on its head. The Sultan and his reforming ministers assumed
that the traditional social order—the separation of high and low, elite and
nonelite—would remain unchanged by reform. Indeed Ottoman officials
saw that the right to religious equality in a modernizing empire was possi-
ble and desirable only if all subjects maintained their hudud, or station in
life. It never occurred to the reformers that the upheavals of reform would
provide for a subaltern understanding of the Tanzimat. Shahin’s insistence
that the Tanzimat mandated equality within as well as between religious
communities contradicted an imperial Ottoman understanding of the Tan-
zimat as a socially conservative project of secular modernization. The anx-
iety of the Ottomans in the face of Shahin’s rebellion was magnified by the
fact that Kisrawan was a rural region of a hitherto insignificant hinterland
which had occupied, at best, a marginal place in Ottoman imperial imagi-
nation. How could a villager from Kisrawan—and an allegedly illiterate
Arabic-speaking muleteer to boot—represent the Tanzimat? And by
whose authority did he rebel? Was he an Ottoman? Imperial officials an-
swered these questions in the language of the old regime. Their categori-
cally negative answers reflected their inability, indeed their refusal, to


[PDF page 124]
106 / The Return of the Juhhal
comprehend the manifold consequences of the Tanzimat, one of which was
the rise of Tanyus Shahin.
The Ottoman government was neither directly nor indirectly support-
ive of the Kisrawan revolt.42 The governor of Sayda, Hurs¸id Pasha, never
for a moment doubted that a restoration of order was the highest priority.
His sympathies were inclined toward the Khazins, but his powerlessness
and lack of money, far more than his duty to ensure justice for all subjects,
steered him in a more equitable direction. Despite the historiographical
myth put forward by many historians of Lebanon and by European chron-
iclers that Hurs¸id was “behind” (or at least tacitly supported) the uprising
to weaken a putative Lebanese solidarity, all evidence points to the fact that
he was a man constrained from pacifying the region by the European in-
sistence that he not send Ottoman troops into Kisrawan.43
The Ottoman attitude toward the Kisrawan uprising was dominated by
a desire to contain the unrest and restore the social order while maintain-
ing the myth of sultanic benevolence for all subjects. Hurs¸id wrote to the
Patriarch complaining of the “leaders of sedition [ru’asa al-fasad]” who
were behind the uprising; he accused them of manipulating the “minds of
the simple ones [‘uqul al-sadhijin]”—that is to say, the minds of the ahali
who were in rebellion against Khazin domination. Hurs¸id’s polemic against
Tanyus Shahin centered around his accusation that Shahin used “deceit to
lead astray the minds of the people and to seduce them into following his
evil ways” by playing on their religious sentiments and claiming the Patri-
arch’s support. Hurs¸id urged the Patriarch to use his considerable spiritual
authority to reclaim the minds of the ignorant ahali.44 The insistence of
the Ottoman governor on the simple folk– evil conspirator theme was not
fortuitous. Like the discourse of juhhal employed by the Khazins, the idea
was to invoke a basic and constant loyalty of the ahali to the Ottoman gov-
ernment’s rigid social order, which was manipulated by Shahin’s clever
ploys.
Silencing Shahin, the logic of government went, would restore the ahali
to their senses—a sentiment echoed by the Khazins and the Maronite
Church; the implication, of course, was that, at bottom, the social order
was not in crisis.45 The Ottoman government rarely uttered Shahin’s
name, preferring to label him the “leader of corruption and sedition.”
When Hurs¸id Pasha sent Emir Yusuf ‘Ali Murad, a Maronite notable from
the Abilam‘ family, to discipline the rebels, Shahin informed the emir that
“the Christians of Bilad Jbayl have united with the ahali of Kisrawan” and
warned him not to intervene in the affairs of the Christians of Jbayl, “as
you may be aware that all the Christians of Syria have made common cause


[PDF page 125]
The Return of the Juhhal / 107
just as you have united with the Druzes, the shaykhs, the muqata‘jis in all
areas as is evident by the compacts you have stamped with your seals, your
objective being to subjugate [qahr] the Christians after we achieved our
[freedom?].” Shahin continued his accusations, saying that “all your ac-
tions have become common knowledge,” including an attack by “your rel-
atives the Druzes” on a monastery. “Return without delay, for if you do
not, we will not be held responsible. . . . Do not remain even an hour
longer.” In a postscript to this same letter, which he signed as “the general
representative of the Christians,” Shahin declared:
Because you are Christian, and because your intentions [are in alliance
with] the Druzes, we are warning you without haughtiness: if you desire
[to fight], we are more eager than you, and we are not afraid, because the
death of a youth in his prime is like his wedding. . . . Return without
[causing] treachery like the ahali of Baskinta, and stay dignified without
becoming a laughingstock, because nobody will respect the stature of he
who does not maintain his station. Because you are a man of knowledge,
there is no need to be any clearer, because our warning deserves some at-
tention, for he who makes you laugh, makes you cry and he who makes
you cry, makes you laugh. If you say that emirs are not written to in this
manner, it still serves you better than other [means] because writing can
46
be concealed, but what do you do to someone who curses you openly?
Such an astounding warning only added to the general anxiety among
the elites, especially among the Maronite Patriarch, the Christian kay-
makam, and the Ottoman government. It represented a reversal of estab-
lished hierarchy and discourse, as a muleteer was now addressing an emir
with impudence, respecting the forms of neither letter writing nor lan-
guage. The letter began with the ritual honorific “after kissing your noble
hands,” which implied respect for tradition and hierarchy. However, as is
obvious from the rest of the letter, which is written in common dialect,
Shahin neither would kiss the hands of a “traitor” who had sided with the
Druzes nor would allow Emir Yusuf ‘Ali’s “plans” to bear fruit. Beyond the
mere insults and threats, it was Shahin’s claim to knowledge that infuriated
the elites—and removed him, in their eyes, from the level of the “igno-
rant” ahali into the realm of shadowy cunning conspirators.
Shahin spoke with the authority of a man who knew he had the support,
or at least the intimidated consent, of most of the ahali of Kisrawan. He
spoke of love of religion, which no Christian emir and certainly not the Pa-
triarch could dismiss out of hand. Shahin deployed a religious discourse to
galvanize support for the uprising and defend its achievements in the face
of the elitist counterreaction. By presenting the betrayal of the Christian


[PDF page 126]
108 / The Return of the Juhhal
elites in religious terms and equating it with sin, Shahin justified his own
course of sedition. In another letter to Emir Yusuf ‘Ali Murad’s adjunct,
one Yazbak Lahud, Shahin repeated his threats against the elites “who de-
sired to make war on those who have joined with the ahali of Kisrawan, be-
cause all the Christians are joined in common cause.” Shahin could not re-
sist adding that “you deserve to be humiliated in writing and otherwise for
your actions. Return to your religion and stand united. Where do you get
the right to abandon your religion of Christianity without opprobrium?
Religion can not be sold for money; [besides] you are not needy [and thus
do not need] to pursue this course that satisfies nobody.”47 Here, then, was
a popular voice, disquieting both in its lack of refinement and in its re-
course to a populist, religious-based knowledge. Shahin posed an obvious
challenge to the Ottoman state by claiming to know, to interpret, and,
above all, to act in defense of certain rights to which he felt entitled because
he was Christian. For Shahin to be a modern Ottoman subject was to be a
sectarian subject. And, yet, Shahin posed an enormous challenge for the
entire elite sectarian system because he equated a religious Christian dis-
course of freedom with a social discourse of equality.
the layers of sectarian identity
Shahin’s reliance on sectarian language has been variously interpreted in
the historiography of Kisrawan as a diversion or corruption of a class
struggle into a religious struggle—the idea being, of course, that sectarian
struggle is necessarily less legitimate than class struggle and indeed is con-
tradictory to it.48 Such history, however, overlooks the fact that the popu-
lar movement and the opposition to it were from the outset informed by a
religious discourse. The battle between the Khazins and Shahin to appro-
priate the name of the Patriarch—through the various appeals to the Pa-
triarch as well as through actions said to have the Patriarch’s blessing—
was symptomatic of this struggle to define a quiescent or mobilized
sectarian identity. But it went far beyond this struggle, for the issue was
one of survival in a postpartition world. Both sides insisted that their re-
spective position guaranteed a viable Christian community; both sides in-
variably conflated Maronite with Christian; and both insisted that their
opponents doomed it to destruction. From the beginning of the rebellion,
the relationship between communal identity and a stable social order de-
fined the problem at hand. For the Khazins, the survival of Christianity in
Mount Lebanon was tied to a suppression of what they considered the or-


[PDF page 127]
The Return of the Juhhal / 109
chestrated events of Kisrawan. Their wretched fate, they warned the
British consul, foreshadowed the fate of the region’s Christian inhabitants,
for it was clear to them, as they explained separately to the Patriarch, that
a “foreign,” satanically inspired, non-Maronite conspiracy motivated the
“ignorant” villagers of Kisrawan.49 For Shahin and the rebels, however,
exactly the opposite was true. In repeated petitions to the Patriarch, the vil-
lagers claimed that they desired only to live in dignity with the Patriarch’s
blessing, free from corruption and intimidation, and in accordance with the
freedom guaranteed to them by the Tanzimat. Shahin went even further.
He asserted that “I have a boyoroldi [buyrultu, official Ottoman decree or
mandate] from the Seven Sovereigns . . . giving liberty to all Christians
[stating] that they are not to be in bondage to anyone; if you desire eman-
cipation from slavery, no one can prevent you, neither the mushir [a refer-
ence to Hurs¸id Pasha] nor the kaimakam.”50
To a certain degree, Shahin’s own background and religiosity facilitated
the task of the ahali to present a subversive “Christian” alternative to the
status quo. Born into poverty, Shahin nevertheless associated himself with
the Lazarist school in Rayfun and became a muleteer. He made use of his
contact with the Lazarists; they obtained for him credentials from the
French consulate in Beirut that allowed him to travel into cities, and he
kept close company with village priests.51 The documents that bear his seal
(and sometimes his signature) were probably written by clergymen sym-
pathetic to his cause.52 He was allegedly so devout that he prayed twice a
day and refused to eat meat except on Sundays and religious holidays.53
One of the surviving documents containing his seal is a letter to the clergy
of the village of ‘Aramun, in which he writes:
Then we inform Your Reverences what must already be known to you,
concerning the incidents that occur on festival days as a result of drink-
ing ‘araq and wine. The Council agreed that it was necessary to an-
nounce in all places that whoever drinks ‘araq or wine outside his house
and there results from it any mischief, unseemly talk, cursing or quar-
reling, etc. this is in itself a very vile thing. Then may God—be He ex-
alted!—the faithful of the Church, and the leaders all proclaim this. We
hope that Your Reverences will announce this in church to all the popu-
lace. Whoever transgresses after the announcement is made, and does
the slightest mischief, will be punished by one month’s [imprisonment]
or several times that much. We are sure that such things will not occur
from among your congregation, but since the announcement was to be
made in all places, it was necessary to inform Your Reverences and the
54
populace of it.


[PDF page 128]
110 / The Return of the Juhhal
Shahin derived his authority from a genuinely popular base, but he spread
it, at least in part, through the pulpits of Mount Lebanon. Even as he en-
acted new laws and drew up punishments—in the case of insalubrious be-
havior and disorderly conduct the rather arbitrary “one month’s imprison-
ment or several times that much”—by referring back to his subversive
authority, he nevertheless used established channels of communication,
such as Sunday sermons, to diffuse his message of a sober, Christian way
of life. In his mind at least, the survival of Christians was organically con-
nected to liberation from Khazin domination and, soon enough, from the
grip that the Druze landowners maintained over the Christians in the
mixed districts.
Shahin also tapped a wider Christian discourse when he went from call-
ing himself the “general representative of Kisrawan” to the “general rep-
resentative of the Christians.” The religiosity of the uprising present from
the beginning intensified when the popular rebellion reached beyond the
boundaries of Kisrawan into regions inhabited by Druzes, by Shi‘a, and by
other Christian sects. In May of 1859, for example, the Christian villagers
of Hammana (in the Matn district) refused to accept the authority of the
kaymakam, justifying their insubordination by pointing to the example of
Kisrawan. Bashir Ahmad had made the unpopular decision of “returning”
the village to a Druze notable family that had “traditional” claims to the
land. The Christian ahali immediately sent off appeals to the Patriarch and
to Hurs¸id pleading their case. It was, they said to the Ottoman governor,
“contrary to the Lebanese order and privileges that were granted to us by
the mercies of the Sublime Porte, as we are entirely Christian and the
aforementioned muqaddam is a Druze.”55 In an appeal to the Patriarch
they not only stated that the decision by Bashir Ahmad was against “the
regulations and privileges of Mount Lebanon granted to it [by the Sublime
Porte]” but wondered, “If the ahali of Ghazir who are of the same sect as
their shaykhs, and who have been ruled by them from time immemorial
. . . at present refuse to acknowledge or submit to the authority of any of
[their] shaykhs, how is it possible that a Druze ruler be imposed on us, who
are all Christian?”56
Soon, in other areas of Mount Lebanon, the religiosity of the Kisrawan
uprising began to become its most defining characteristic; it gave the
movement strength. Far from reducing Shahin’s status, it increased his
prestige as he began to wage campaigns against neighboring Shi‘a notables
and ordinary Shi‘a villagers, who suffered the brunt of these expeditions.
An undated letter written by a priest addressed Shahin as a bek [bey, an
Ottoman title for a notable] and informed him that a Christian from his


[PDF page 129]
The Return of the Juhhal / 111
village went to a Shi‘a village to “try and collect some money owed to him
by one Husayn Haydar and by ‘Ali Hasan ‘Abbas. They maltreated him
and beat him painfully.” The priest continued, “Since Your Excellency
asked after us when we had no complaints, now that we do have complaints
you must ask after us [again] and restrain the Mutawalis (Shi‘a) from us.
For the Creator gave you a strong voice with which to defend the rights of
all Christians and set our minds at rest. As for the Mutawalis, they are dis-
respectful of you. We hope to recover our rights [and indemnity for] the
beating.”57 In June of 1859, Shi‘a villagers in Jbayl protested the attacks
they were suffering at the hands of the “Maronite ahali of Kisrawan, Ftuh
and Bilad Jbayl,” which were led, they claimed, by Tanyus Shahin, who
plundered their property and waylaid hapless villagers on the main roads.
Some of the Shi‘a villagers were made to change “their religion” if they
wished to be spared. Such gross violations of social order, of course, in-
creased the contempt that elites reserved for Shahin and the “men of the
jumhuriyya [literally, republic],” but they bolstered Shahin’s reputation as
a defender of Christian rights.58 Many Maronite villagers claimed that
Shahin had, in fact, saved them “from the attacks of the Shi‘a on us.” They
interpreted any Ottoman attempt to arrest Shahin and, therefore, to
“break the cause of the Chrstians” to be the result of bribery on the part of
the Khazins.59
Sectarian imagery was very much tied to popular mobilization, in
which Shahin’s followers began to take on the task of “protecting” Chris-
tianity, even representing it, in light of the elite feuds that tore apart the
notion of the communal solidarity of Christians. In other words, the grow-
ing frustration of the elites with their combined inability to suppress
Shahin was contrasted with the increasing boldness of the ahali. These
rebels, the majority of whom remain anonymous, articulated—in sectar-
ian attacks against the Shi‘a villagers, in raids across the borders of
Kisrawan, in threats against quietist villages like Ghusta, in beatings of
Christian notables, in the expulsion of the Khazins, and in indirect defi-
ance of both Ottoman and Patriarchal orders of calm by turning the dis-
course of “ignorance” on its head—a populist communal vision of the role
of the Christian in postpartition Mount Lebanon. To them, Shahin was de-
fending the “rights” granted by the Tanzimat, in terms of both equity with
the notables and equality with the non-Muslims; he was to defend Chris-
tian villagers from the alleged depredations of non-Christians as much as
he was to ward off elitist attempts to pacify Kisrawan, especially after the
notables had “betrayed” the religion of the Christians as well as the spirit
of the Tanzimat.


[PDF page 130]
112 / The Return of the Juhhal
This “betrayal” became clearer in the eyes of the rebellious ahali fol-
lowing the Druze-Christian battle of Bayt Miri in August of 1859. This in-
tercommunal fracas, according to a report compiled by Bishop ‘Awn, began
with a “trivial” incident. A Druze, ‘Awn claimed, fought with a Christian
boy “on the road” and hit him. The Christian went home and told his fa-
ther what had happened. The father, rather impulsively, implies ‘Awn,
took two men with him and “took revenge” on the first Druze whom he
came across, who was not the man who had hit his son nor even from the
same family. When reports of this arbitrary beating were heard, a great
“commotion” occurred, as “both sides” prepared for hostilities; then “Iblis
[the Devil] played with the minds of the juhhal of both sides, and suddenly
the sedition began, with both sides firing shots on the other.”60 Nine
Christian men and one Christian woman were killed, and “it was said” that
thirty Druzes were slain. Fighting spread across the “mixed” villages of
the Matn district. The Maronite bishops and Druze religious leaders (by
‘Awn’s own admission) struggled to retain order there and castigated the
“ignorant” for their actions. ‘Awn even appealed to the Ottoman authori-
ties for help and promptly received it when they sent an expeditionary
force to separate the warring factions. The elites of both sides tried to
“calm” the situation by ordering the armed men to disband; in Ham-
mana—the same village that had seen the ahali reject the imposition of a
Druze notable over them just months before—“the respectable faces of
the Christians and Druzes of the Matn” jointly vowed to “prevent the ex-
tension of the movement.” ‘Awn concluded his report with the observation
that “although precaution and alertness against being double-crossed [by
the Druze notables] are necessary, it is our opinion . . . that those who are
wise from both sides [realize that fighting] will end in loss, destruction and
obliteration.”61
The atmosphere was so tense an American missionary residing in
Mount Lebanon remarked that “great excitement prevails yet throughout
the entire mountains. It is my expectation however, that there will be no
general war. There is no political motive, and all Emers [sic], Sheiks, and
influential men of both parties, are anxious to preserve peace. They have
everything to lose and nothing to gain by a war, and if there is a civil war,
it will be waged by the people without the concurrence of their
leaders.”62
This is exactly what worried ‘Awn even more than his fear of the Druzes.
The longer tension remained in the air, the less he was able to control the
ta’ifa. He warned ominously and rather cryptically, “Foreign hands are at
play, and our people are [endowed with] little perception and knowledge
and thus tend to the voice of the foreigner, doing away with that of their


[PDF page 131]
The Return of the Juhhal / 113
shepherd and guardian [ra‘ihi].” Moreover, he warned the Patriarch that
the government took a dim view of “our ta’ifa” because of the events of
Kisrawan.
Instead of the ordered and unified Maronite nation extolled by Bishop
Murad, ‘Awn sensed, much to his horror, a popular fury that was suppos-
edly being controlled by conspiratorial hands. His worries were com-
pounded because in their moment of fear and crisis, the ahali of Bayt Miri
turned to the hero of the Christian popular imagination, the bek Tanyus
Shahin. To him and to the other leaders of the shabab (young men) of
Kisrawan they appealed as “brothers” in distress surrounded by Druzes
who, in their view, had commenced hostilities. They asked Shahin to
“come quickly with a large jumhur so that if they desire evil we will be
ready with our own masses.”63 They appealed to Shahin in part because his
reputation had spread far beyond the borders of Kisrawan, in part because
he embodied the only hope of the Christian ahali overwhelmed by a fear
of their Druze neighbors.64
The appeal to Shahin was, if nothing else, a reflection of the growing
disillusionment with the efficacy of the local elites. While Shahin was pre-
senting himself in increasingly strident tones and with “Christian zeal,”
the notables tried, once more, to maintain their tenuous hold on the ahali
and on social order. In the aftermath of the Bayt Miri incident and the
fighting that engulfed the Matn district, Druze and Christian notables met
first in Hammana and then at Mdayrij (where Hurs¸id set up camp to over-
see the restoration of order) toward the end of August. Their meeting had
all the hallmarks of a declaration of a counterrevolution against the mobi-
lization of the ahali—both in Kisrawan and in the Matn. It represented
their attempt to contain once more the subaltern mobilization and to stifle
the ahali by reclaiming the representation of their respective ta’ifas. The
meeting was meant to end the years of bickering, infighting, and compet-
ing claims of compensation from the Ottoman authorities in Beirut. There
in Mdayrij in the Shuf, a stone’s throw from the Dahr al-Baydar mountain
pass, from whose vantage point the notables could survey their domains,
which were inhabited by the unruly ahali, a Druze landowner, shaykh
Husayn Talhuq, addressed the Christian notables with not a little impa-
tience, according to a report of the meeting sent to the Patriarch.65 The
most important reason for all the disturbances, he stressed to the gather-
ing of Mount Lebanon’s elites, was the fact that the Druze and Christian
notables and kaymakams had been unable to agree in the recent past; this
lack of agreement had “diminished from their station and caused the lack
of deference for them on the part of the ahali.” It had also, he continued,


[PDF page 132]
114 / The Return of the Juhhal
turning toward the notables from Kisrawan, brought about the demise of
the Khazins. Then shaykh Husayn stoped and asked each notable present,
one by one, Druze and Christian, whether their ahali respected their posi-
tions and rank. Each notable solemnly said no; shaykh Husayn proposed
that all the notables sign a compact to be “one hand.” They did. And they
agreed to march on Kisrawan to “discipline” the ahali.
Satisfied, the notables returned to their districts and, according to the
report, “exhibited an unusual determination to subdue the ahali” and be-
gan to prepare for the joint onslaught on Kisrawan to “return the Khazin
shaykhs by any means necessary” with the support of the Ottoman gov-
ernment. But before the march could begin, the insurgent ahali of
Kisrawan got word of the impending expedition; they too issued calls for
unity, and rumors spread about a compact of the Christian ahali to be “one
hand” and to defend their “common interest against any, grand or small,
who might infringe upon their rights.” The shaykhs of the Matn were sud-
denly seized with a fear that what had happened to the Khazins in
Kisrawan might happen to them. The expedition was aborted when it be-
came clear that the Christians of the Matn would not march on Kisrawan
under the notables.
On August 29 the ahali of Jbayl and Batrun agreed to be “one hand and
one mind” in opposition to any who might attack their jumhur.66 The
agreement stated that “this our compact is also to help our brothers the
Christians living in the other neighboring districts to the best of our abili-
ties.” It was also decided that in each village a wakil, or representative,
would be chosen by the ahali to tend to their “interests.” The wakil had to
be someone who worked not for his own private interests but for the in-
terests of the masses; he had to be “conscious” (mudrikan) of the “com-
mon welfare” (al-khayr al-‘am). In return the people had to listen to him
and to follow the common good just as the wakil was not to take any deci-
sion without first consulting with the ahali. Before making any decision
affecting the “common interests” of all, the wakils had to discuss the deci-
sion with each other. If ever a wakil was found to be “untrustworthy to
represent the interests of his village or the interests of the jumhur,” he
would be dismissed. “We ask God,” concluded the ahali signing the agree-
ment, “that this unity meets with His glory and [results in] the repose of
our jumhur.”67
The elitist countermovement of Mdayrij and the intercommunal Matn
clashes of the summer of 1859 did not weaken the resolve of the popular
mobilizations in Kisrawan; in fact, it gave them a general orientation that
extended beyond the immediate problems of particular villages with their


[PDF page 133]
The Return of the Juhhal / 115
traditional notables. The jumhur—in this context, the gathering of the
commoners—was aimed at defending their rights against both the Druzes
and the Christian notables, whom Shahin had disparagingly described as
the “relatives” of the Druzes. In the prereform society, this association be-
tween the elites of different sects had a positive connotation that reflected
the brotherhood of the notables in a hierarchical society in which power
was shared among the major families. But in the postrestoration society it
was increasingly becoming synonymous with betrayal. In part this change
in meaning stemmed from the memory of sectarian conflict in 1841; in
part, it reflected the overlap of social and sectarian interests in a parti-
tioned society that thrust Christian ahali under the rule of Druze notables
in the “mixed” districts of Mount Lebanon. In the main, however, it illus-
trated a popular participation in politics that conflated the defense of re-
form with the salvation of “the” Christian community. It shifted, in other
words, the basis of loyalty away from a notable family toward an imagined
political sectarian community.
Shahin’s uprising contested the notion of community and its leadership in
the post-Tanzimat era. The notion of a singular ahali, quiescent or mobi-
lized, was a figment of imagination, a rhetorical, political, and moral con-
struction that was deployed by both Shahin and the Khazins to legitimize
or delegitimize the Kisrawan rebellion. However, Shahin’s fiery Christian
rhetoric, his attacks on Shi‘a communities in and around Kisrawan, and his
call for the liberation of all Christians announced a popular sectarian vision
that, in essence, overturned the hierarchical social order. His popularity,
attested to by the panicked letters sent by Maronite bishops to their Patri-
arch warning him that they were losing control of their flock to Shahin’s
populism and by the letters sent to Shahin by Christian villagers in the
Druze districts asking for his help in liberating them, indicated a profound
crisis in traditional order. The crisis became a catastrophe in the spring of
1860, when the social unrest spread to the so-called mixed districts.
“Christian zeal [al-ghira al-masihiyya]” was not simply a religious slogan
bandied about by the ahali as they prepared to defend themselves from (or
to attack, depending on one’s perspective) non-Christians. It marked for
them a coming of age—not a return to a primordial kinship with other
Christians but a new geography that enabled them to come to the aid of
“brothers” in distress in Shi‘a and Druze regions of Mount Lebanon. It
was intertwined with a vocabulary of rights and an understanding of the
Tanzimat that legitimated the entrance of the mobilized general population
(jumhur) into formal politics. In the final analysis, it was the proclama-


[PDF page 134]
116 / The Return of the Juhhal
tion—if not fulfillment— of a subversive sectarian history and geogra-
phy.
Shahin’s populism was not more authentic or somehow historically
more progressive than the Khazins’ conservative vision of the Tanzimat;
nor was his discourse of the mobilized jumhur any more accurate a reflec-
tion of social reality than the Khazins’ descriptions of a quiescent ahali.
Shahin was not a pure class warrior, nor was the struggle in Kisrawan a
purely social struggle. As is so often the case with popular insurgencies,
Shahin began to conflate his own personal vision and interests with that of
the jumhur. His rise was meteoric, from an impoverished muleteer who
had traveled the width and breadth of Kisrawan to a legend whose fame
brought him accolades and appeals from across Mount Lebanon. He was
described as the “father of the sharpened sword” in a popular ballad, the
man who had provided the “peasant” with food and shelter while the
Khazin shaykhs “in Bikfayya of hunger died.”68 He was addressed as a bek,
which he quickly adopted as a title, and he provided himself with a seal that
rivaled those of the shaykhs. And as their efforts to vanquish him and the
juhhal by force failed, the elites began to address him as a shaykh. With his
unheard-of leap up the social ladder came the expected responsibilities of
the traditional notables against whom he was in rebellion: to control the
juhhal, to offer protection, to dictate morals, to reclaim debts, to disperse
crowds, and to be a za‘im [to be and, more important, to pose as a leader],
all of which he did with “Christian” faithfulness once his position in
Kisrawan was secure.69
The evident disjuncture between a homogenizing discourse and a het-
erogeneous reality—be it at the level of Bishop Murad’s Notice historique
or Tanyus Shahin’s jumhur— constituted the fundamental crisis in com-
munal identity and representation. This contradiction did not prevent men
like Shahin and, as we shall soon see, members of the Druze community
from acting to reconcile the contradictions of reform in Mount Lebanon,
from forcing reality, as it were, to conform to narrative. Just as the Khazins
had tried to physically end the rebellion and redefine the geography of
Kisrawan on the basis of loyalty to their family—for example when they
kidnapped and severely humiliated and beat two muleteers in a monastery
until blood “ran down their bodies as if it were water” and warned them to
“take heed that we do not want, and will not accept anyone who crosses
from Bilad Kisrawan to our bilad, Bilad Jbayl, or else we will do [as we have
done here]”70—some among the commoners of Kisrawan, flush with an
inflated sense of their own power, were not averse to redefining the bound-
aries of loyalty and treachery and to imposing new geographies of libera-


[PDF page 135]
The Return of the Juhhal / 117
tion and fear. In December of 1859, they marched on Baskinta to settle
some local affair; in April of 1860, the Patriarch received reports that
Shahin was spreading “rumors” to the ahali of Bilad Jbayl that Zahla, Dayr
al-Qamar, and the Matn were “united with him” and were “waiting for his
orders”;71 and in May of 1860 villagers from Kisrawan marched further
south still. “We have no idea” of what tomorrow will bring, read one re-
port to the authorities. They were soon to find out.


[PDF page 136]
7 The Devil’s Work
I
t was the devil’s work. Such, at least, was the conviction of the anony-
mous author of a manuscript that described the devastation of Mount
Lebanon in 1860.1 Between May and the end of June, when the unrest of
Kisrawan spread to the mixed districts and when Christian ahali openly
repudiated Druze hegemony, crisis became catastrophe. In the months pre-
ceding the outbreak of war in late May, sectarian tensions ran high. Seem-
ingly random murders of Druzes and Maronites occurred in the first half
of 1860, which invariably drew retaliation. The intercommunal strife esca-
lated when villagers from Kisrawan mobilized in May and marched south
toward the Shuf—whether in response to Druze provocations or the cause
of Druze aggression is not, and probably will never be, known. What is cer-
tain, however, is that these mobilizations led to full-scale hostilities be-
tween Druzes and Maronites. At least two hundred villages were destroyed
in the resulting sectarian conflict. Thousands of villagers were maimed and
killed in what amounted to a savage campaign by both Christians and
Druzes to purify the land and to militarily resolve the contradictions of re-
form. The Druzes ultimately emerged victorious after their assaults
against Dayr al-Qamar, Zahla, Hasbayya, and Rashayya culminated in an
unprecedented rout and massacre of the Christian inhabitants.2 On one
level, therefore, the anonymous author who invoked the Devil’s name was
reacting to the horror of total Christian defeat; he was trying to come to
terms with a cataclysm whose magnitude, whose scale, and whose mean-
ing could not be conveyed through the historiographical tropes of every-
day politics in the old regime.
Many reasons, to be sure, have been advanced for the intensity of the
violence that occurred in June. Several accounts have emphasized the role
played by the rebels in Kisrawan in precipitating the war of 1860, espe-
118


[PDF page 137]
The Devil’s Work / 119
cially Tanyus Shahin’s proclamations, which provoked a great anxiety
among the Druzes, who had no place in his sectarian vision of liberation.3
Others, like the author of the manuscript Kitab nawadir al-zaman fi
tarikh Jabal Lubnan, claim that 1860 was “revenge” for the fighting of
the 1840s, when the Christians burned many of the villages in the Shuf.4
The most common and persuasive interpretation put forward by histori-
ans rests on a combination of causal factors, including alleged Ottoman
policies of “divide and rule,” Great Power machinations, material factors
such as the decline of textile production in Syria, and sectarian tensions
left over from the days of the Egyptian occupation.5 While the search for
“root causes” of the violence has illuminated many different aspects of the
struggle in 1860, the historiography of the period has not yet delved into
the nature of the violence itself.6 Despite their many differences, histori-
ans have approached the question of 1860 with one overriding concern:
how to explain the “degeneration” of Mount Lebanon. The violence
therefore is treated as symptomatic rather than as instructive in its own
right.7 Rarely discussed—although it seems to be one of the fundamental
facets of the war of 1860 —is its transgressive nature, which violated so-
cial as well as geographic and religious boundaries. Although many times
during the strife common villagers stood behind their notables, especially
when a village or community was threatened with total extirpation, the
isolated killings, the battles for control of particular villages, and the gen-
eral massacres were elements of a wider struggle under way since the ad-
vent of the Tanzimat and restoration in 1840, but particularly since the
Kisrawan revolt in 1858, to demarcate new social and physical bound-
aries.8
This chapter narrates how the elites of Mount Lebanon repeatedly and
desperately tried to regain the initiative from the mobilized populace as the
war proceeded and how they finally succeeded in reconstituting the social
order after the fighting ended in Mount Lebanon. In doing so, it concen-
trates on certain moments of violence that cast light on the nature and con-
tradictions of sectarianism.9 The goal is to highlight the social tension in-
herent in the religious strife—not simply across communal boundaries
but within them as well.10 The goal is also to unsettle the pretension of ho-
mogeneity and solidity of communal identity that the term sectarianism
implies. The war of 1860 was an attempt to resolve the contradictions of
and the fears engendered by the conflicting sectarian imaginations let
loose on the land since the restoration of Ottoman rule in 1840. The vio-
lence indicated not a resurfacing of old hatreds but a historical develop-
ment of new ones. It must be understood, in its most immediate and dra-


[PDF page 138]
120 / The Devil’s Work
matic context, as a single challenge to the social order that began in
Kisrawan in 1858 and culminated in the mixed districts in the summer of
1860.
the context of the 1860 events
The panic that Shahin induced among the notables in Baskinta, the sheer
apoplexy he generated in the British consul in Beirut and the French con-
sul, as well as the consternation he elicited from the Christian kaymakam,
Maronite bishops, and the Patriarch point toward a profound instability in
the representation of a single Christian community. In the space of a year
and a half, from Christmas 1858, when Shahin first rose to prominence,
until the intercommunal clashes of the summer of 1860, the notion of who
represented the Maronite sect and, indeed, what the parameters of accept-
able behavior were for anybody belonging to that sect remained ambigu-
ous. Throughout 1860, Shahin and ahali like him saw little difference be-
tween social liberation in Kisrawan and freedom from Druze “tyranny”
for the Christians of the mixed regions. Persistent rumors that the Patri-
arch blessed Shahin thrived despite repeated denials by the Patriarch.
When two villagers from Ghusta appeared suddenly in May of 1860 at the
entrance of a Maronite Church headed by a Khazin and demanded 2,000
piasters to fight the Druzes, the lines between extortion, anti-Khazin sen-
timent, and genuine concern for the fate of Christians in the mixed dis-
tricts became increasingly difficult to demarcate.11
When Shahin’s men crossed Nahr al-Kalb in May of 1860 on their way
to defend the Christians of the mixed districts, their challenge to the elit-
ist social order was threefold. First, they staked their claim as defenders of
the faith when it became clear in their eyes that the notables and the con-
suls were not moving quickly enough to protect the Christian commu-
nity.12 Second, they imagined a Christian geography that bound villagers
from Kisrawan to those of the Matn and the Shuf; in so doing they defied
the traditional demarcations of the notable families that had hitherto de-
fined Lebanese geography, and they ignored the new geography of the Eu-
ropean-Ottoman partition that delegated authority to kaymakams chosen
from among the elites. Third, and perhaps most important, the rebels pre-
served their autonomy by taking matters into their own hands. They did
not wait to be ordered into action; they provoked action.13 The rebels did
not heed the threats of Hurs¸id Pasha, the governor of Sayda, to disband and
disperse from an imperial road (from Juniya to Beirut). On the contrary,
they continued their display of armed insurrection, which, while not


[PDF page 139]
The Devil’s Work / 121
specifically directed against the Ottoman state, was nevertheless a
poignant reminder of their subversive understanding of Ottoman re-
form.14
Around these mobilizations, the elitist reaction to contain the “disor-
der” attained a nearly frantic pace. Meetings were held around the clock in
Beirut; secret envoys were sent from the French consulate to the Patriar-
chate to settle on a common position which could be presented to the Ot-
toman government. The French consul, the Comte de Bentivoglio, stalled
for time when the Ottoman government gave orders in April of 1860 to
send troops to Kisrawan to “restore the ahali to the yoke of obedience.” For
Bentivoglio, Kisrawan had to remain an inviolable Christian sanctuary.
The presence of Ottoman soldiers there, he warned the Patriarch, would
certainly bring “ruin to the country.”15 Earlier, in a long dispatch to the
foreign ministry in the beginning of 1860, Bentivoglio had candidly ex-
pressed his fears of the intensification of the “revolution” in which the
clergy themselves seemed “not to be respected.” More worrisome were the
reports he received that the rebels had been hoisting the French flag at
their meetings and during their “riots.” For that reason he sent a deputy to
restrain the “esprits ignorants et enthousiastes” to try to “to stop the
course of revolution.”16 In a letter to the Patriarch a few days later, Ben-
tivoglio underscored his dismay at the situation: he accused Shahin of de-
liberately manipulating the “anarchy” in Kisrawan to promote a state of
affairs that bore a striking resemblance to the dreaded French Revolution
instead of to an ordered, Catholic, conservative France.17 The English,
Russian, Austrian, and Prussian consuls similarly tried to restore calm.
Druze notables again raised the specter of common ruin if the notables did
not act with unity, while the Khazin shaykhs persisted in their supplica-
tions for help against Shahin from any of the Great Powers who would
grant them an audience.18
The Ottoman authorities summoned Bishop ‘Awn to explain matters,
especially now that the Kisrawanites had “unfurled the flag”—a clear sign
of their willingness to engage in combat—near Nahr al-Kalb. ‘Awn re-
ported Hurs¸id’s impatience with the rebels, saying that the governor
“asked me to transmit to Your Beatitude that we do all we can do to disband
these inappropriate and unruly gatherings, and that Your Beatitude warns
them of the consequences since both Juniya and Nahr al-Kalb are on an
imperial road which is traversed by many men of honor and religion, lest
the slightest attack against them take place.”19
While the commoners from Kisrawan were camped somewhere near
Nahr al-Kalb listening to no orders but their own, in Beirut Bishop ‘Awn,


[PDF page 140]
122 / The Devil’s Work
in his capacity as a representative of the Maronite community, was con-
ducting negotiations with Hurs¸id. The two situations could not have been
more at odds. Around Nahr al-Kalb, billeted on the road, was a ramshackle
assembly of commoners, most of whom would have been illiterate, armed
probably with aging muskets left over from the 1840 allied invasion but
also with daggers and an assortment of weaponry and farm equipment.
They were united by a common fear of the Druzes and a loathing of Khazin
tyranny, convinced of their Christian duty to defend their brethren in the
south and of their rights as guaranteed by the Tanzimat. In Beirut sat
‘Awn, decked out in the finery of a Maronite bishop, negotiating with an
Ottoman governor who held ‘Awn accountable for the “unruly gather-
ings” of the Kisrawanites. The truth of the matter was that ‘Awn had no
control over Shahin or the commoners; he pretended to Hurs¸id that he had
control over the Maronites, just as Bishop Nicolas Murad had earlier pre-
sented himself as the “spokesman” of the Christians in his Notice his-
torique. Consequently, ‘Awn was deemed by Hurs¸id to be the man who
held the popular card in his hand. “Khurshid [Hurs¸id] promised,” wrote
‘Awn to Patriarch Mas‘ad, “to take all necessary steps and I promised him
that we would refrain from all provocation. Accordingly, we implore Your
Beatitude to do what is necessary in regards to Kisrawan, fulfilling the
Governor’s orders.”20 The plea from ‘Awn to Mas‘ad reflected an anxiety
among the elites in Mount Lebanon, who were simply not capable of com-
ing to terms with a genuinely popular dimension to communal discourse
and yet, at the same time, were increasingly aware that they could no
longer ignore it.21
‘Awn urged Tanyus Shahin to end his lack of discipline and to disperse
the crowds gathered in Antilyas. Shahin responded by indirectly high-
lighting the failure of the established hierarchies to protect the rights of
the Christians and added:
We state that the crowd in Antilyas is gathered because of the oppression
that has befallen their Christian brothers by the Druzes who have stolen
their money, killed their priests, plundered their churches and monas-
teries and destroyed their peace—a state of affairs well-known to the
world. . . . And just as we see that what is happening to the Christians [at
the hands of] the Druze sect is happening without protest, we know very
well that we are all slaves of the State and that it is our duty to wish it
happiness and to pray for its continuation just as we earnestly desire that
imperial justice is executed without differentiation; how then can the
Antilyas crowd be dispersed, a crowd which is entirely peaceful and obe-
dient to the State but which waits for the authority of the government


[PDF page 141]
The Devil’s Work / 123
and the fulfillment of its orders which were issued days ago to the Druze
bands who are daily spilling the blood of Christians; so how is it possible
under these conditions to convince the crowd before a single Druze band
22
has been dispersed?
Shahin, in effect, openly proposed to lead the deliverance of the Christians
of the mixed districts in accordance with the precepts of post-Tanzimat Ot-
toman justice. He knew that the Maronite Patriarch could not openly con-
demn a popular initiative to liberate the Christians in the Shuf; besides,
some among the clergy were relieved that Shahin had directed his atten-
tion outside of Kisrawan. One priest writing to the Patriarch confessed that
“everyone” appreciated the rebels’ actions because if they had remained
“white-eyed” (i.e., obstinate in rebellion), they would have been subjected
to the curses of friend and foe alike. The campaign to “save” the Christians
of the mixed districts, he added, was a great opportunity for them and their
leaders to “turn a new page.” Maybe “what Tanyus is doing will force all
the enemy and their leaders to sue for peace with the Christians.”23 Later
this same priest urged the Patriarch to act quickly to save Kisrawan. “Nei-
ther we nor the shaykhs have any doubt,” he said, “you will not let this op-
portunity slip to resolve the [Kisrawan] question through peaceful means.
The fruit we shall reap accordingly shall be to let the government and our
opponents believe that unity has been reached between the Maronites.”24
In May of 1860, however, when the Maronites were called on to pro-
duce their unified sect, villagers in Kisrawan succeeded only in mustering
themselves into a loose fighting force—army would be far too formal a
name for the few hundred villagers camped near Nahr al-Kalb. And even
this band of villagers, according to ‘Awn’s own confession in a confidential
dispatch to his Patriarch, could not be kept in check, “for they are totally
reckless (al-jama‘a fi batr kulli).”25 On the cusp of a dramatic showdown
with the Druzes, the Maronites were in disarray. ‘Awn admitted as much
when he informed Mas‘ad, “We now expect by the minute the beginning
of war, which necessitates alertness from all your children; in case word
reaches them to begin the fighting they will do so as one raging force to
save their brothers, for if they are let down this time we will taste a hu-
miliation more bitter than death itself; . . . we pray to God to grant us a
happy outcome.”26
Shahin himself was under tremendous pressure to live up to his reputa-
tion. On 24 May, for example, villagers from Kisrawan assembled at An-
tilyas wrote to him that they had already burned several Druze houses and
urged him not to delay in joining the battle. “Your mobilization is ab-


[PDF page 142]
124 / The Devil’s Work
solutely necessary,” they wrote, “for if you do not rise as a jumhur imme-
diately the people of Kisrawan [will be thought of as] a laughingstock and
cowards.” The letter went on to inform Shahin that ammunition was read-
ily available and that he should not waste his time seeking the Patriarch’s
blessing “because there is no longer need of it” given that “we are in” the
presence of Mar Ilyas (St. Elie). The plea concluded, “O Bek, O Bek, don’t
throw away the blessing” of Mar Ilyas, and drew attention to the “news”
that Baskinta, Shwayr, and all other districts had risen, except for
Kisrawan.27 As a “bek” Shahin found himself in an ironic position, for he
was confronted with a notion of collective action and will that bypassed
traditional authority, which he had himself repeatedly deployed in
Kisrawan. As rumors swirled around and as the situation in the mixed dis-
tricts deteriorated, the blunt but common-dialect religious discourse of the
letter raised a central question about the 1860 violence: where in Mount
Lebanon were the boundaries of morality, fraternity, civility, and commu-
nity to be drawn, and who was to draw them? Shahin wasted little time in
attempting to answer this question, for he quickly sent off letters to vil-
lages in Kisrawan asking them to contribute to the common cause. He
wrote to the villages of Kfur and Ftuh urging them to send their women to
deliver water to the warriors, telling them that he had plenty of ammuni-
tion, and reminding them to mobilize the clergy for this “Christian” con-
cern.28
the nonemergence of the ta’ifa
In Kisrawan itself, the heartland of the Maronites, the sense of frustration
and failure was even more palpable. Just as Bishop ‘Awn, Hurs¸id Pasha,
and Bentivoglio had each in his own way expressed his anxiety at the un-
folding events, the Jesuits who had ensconced themselves in Ghazir left a
diary that captured the fear of 1860 and the general Jesuit disappointment
with the nonemergence of the Maronite nation in its most desperate hour.
At first, rumors arrived that sectarian tensions had boiled over into skir-
mishes. The entry for 16 May, for example, notes that two Muslims were
assassinated near Ghazir and that the inhabitants pursued the assailants,
six Orthodox men, and caught and imprisoned them only to release them
when it was feared that their incarceration would provoke “sedition” in the
country.29 On the 19th, there was “talk” of the killings of fourteen Chris-
tians by the Druzes and also of the murder of three Druzes. Letters arrived
from Beirut that day urging the inhabitants of Ghazir to take up arms
against the Druzes; the next day another letter arrived once more exhort-


[PDF page 143]
The Devil’s Work / 125
ing the people of Ghazir to march on the Druzes. On the 22nd a third let-
ter came, saying that if the people of Ghazir ignored the call for help, the
summons would not be repeated.30
The Jesuits, meanwhile, were actively encouraging the inhabitants to
maintain hope for a Christian victory, while they themselves anxiously
waited for news from the front. They learned that the Maronite Patriarch
had offered to defray the costs of volunteers who were willing to head
south, but as the entry for 23 May stated, “For a long time the church bell
of Ghazir has been tolling to gather the villagers together and to decide
who must march against the Druzes. But it seems that nobody wants to
leave his home.”31 From Bikfayya came two Jesuit priests who had fled for
their lives. Father Abougit gave sermons exhorting the notables and com-
moners to take courage: all of the small number of notables departing
southward came to the Jesuits, made their confessions, and then stitched a
cross on their garments. They tried to muster men to fight the Druzes. Al-
most immediately, however, the notables were warned by the Ottoman au-
thorities that no armed bands were to be tolerated, so they abandoned their
efforts without even leaving the confines of Ghazir.32
Frustration with local unwillingness to save the Christians in the mixed
districts was compounded by increasing panic. On 30 May, a Capuchin
monk brought definite news that war had commenced between Christians
and Druzes. “Indeed,” he confessed, “from our own roof we can see in the
distance the tremendous plumes of smoke.”33 There was talk of raising a
force to join the “army of Kisrawan” led by Tanyus Shahin, but neither the
notables nor the Jesuits were happy with the idea. The Jesuits, in fact, sent
an envoy to the Patriarch to explain that all the misfortunes that had be-
fallen the Maronites in recent times were caused by Shahin.34 Although
the envoy succeeded “in exciting the indignation of these men against this
wicked man,” the entry for 6 June reads, “[the] Patriarch and his Bishops
thought that the time was not ripe to get rid of this man [de le mettre de
côté]. They fear that the army will be divided if such an operation is
mounted.”35
The Maronite establishment was paralyzed with indecision. On the one
hand, sectarian warfare legitimated Tanyus Shahin, but, on the other
hand, his presence symbolized division and disorder in the eyes of the
elites. Once full-scale violence became imminent, by May of 1860, the
Christian bishops and Druze notables could not turn their backs on their
own communities. They could not seem to take the side of the “enemy,”
and so they reluctantly joined the fray, one hand trying to seize the initia-
tive back from the ahali by organizing the defense of the Christians as


[PDF page 144]
126 / The Devil’s Work
Bishops ‘Awn and Butrus al-Bustani did, and the other reaching out to
other notables, foreign consuls, and the Ottoman government to contain
the unrest.36 In Ghazir, meanwhile, the Jesuits who had patiently labored
for three decades to produce reformed and purely Christian spaces sank
back in horror at the unfolding catastrophe. Students in the seminary were
sent home; the library was moved to the vaults. In Bkirke, the Patriarch
also met with Yusuf Karam, a notable from the north, who brought with
him an estimated four hundred Maronite soldiers to repulse the Druzes.
Karam’s men, it seemed, were no more up to the task of saving their
brethren than the Kisrawanites. “Yusuf Karam,” read one of the final en-
tries in the diary, “in an attempt to boost the courage of his men, told them
that he learned that the Druzes had arrived in Shwayr (in the Matn, near
Bikfayya) and that they were threatening to burn it, and that each man
must enter the field of battle and take his weapon and follow him to repulse
the Druzes. But of the nearly 3,000 who daily turn up at the distribution of
rations, barely 400 obeyed the orders of their chief. Yusuf Karam, in de-
spair, disbanded his army, and each man returned to his own village.”37
Day after day, news reached Ghazir of more burnings, more pillaged
monasteries, more Christian “martyrs,” including several Jesuits killed in
Zahla. Day after day, despair sapped te seemingly limitless optimism of the
gentle crusade until, finally, the Jesuits abandoned Ghazir toward the end
of June to board a French frigate.
The frantic withdrawal of the Jesuits to the safety of the French war-
ships was an option not open to the bulk of the Christian inhabitants of
Mount Lebanon. Their lot was to face the wrath of the Druzes in a con-
tested sectarian landscape which the Jesuits, in disgust as much as in dis-
may, had been forced to quit. The killing near Zahla of Father Edouard Bil-
lotet, one of the longest-serving Jesuits, had driven home the point to the
foreign elites: the sectarian mobilizations were difficult, if not impossible,
to control, and the protection long afforded them by Druze and Christian
notables alike had ended in the tumult of war. Shahin and his followers
fared no better under the circumstances. As it turned out, the men from
Kisrawan, who numbered five hundred, failed in their efforts to help their
coreligionists in the Shuf.38 Tanyus Shahin fell sick—a sympathetic source
claimed that he was poisoned— during the march from Kisrawan to the
Matn.39 And his efforts to goad other Kisrawanites into action fell on deaf
ears, especially after it became clear that the battle against the Druzes was
no simple affair.40 Some of those who did march southward settled on pil-
laging a caravan of goods belonging to the Christian kaymakam, including
his prized horses, which he was trying to protect from the Druzes.41 The


[PDF page 145]
The Devil’s Work / 127
French consul wrote to the Patriarch denouncing Kisrawanites who had
plundered a wheat caravan belonging to Muslim traders near Antilyas and
had forced the mules to Rayfun, Tanyus Shahin’s own village.42 The ever-
dwindling number that finally reached the Matn and Shuf districts found
themselves at odds with the local Christians from Bayt Miri and other vil-
lages. Far from welcoming the Kisrawanites as saviors, the Christian vil-
lagers of the mixed districts pleaded with them to return from where they
had come, lest the Druzes use their arrival as a pretext to expel all Chris-
tians from the Shuf.43
The Patriarch received reports that in Bikfayya, in the heart of the
Matn, an assembly of Maronite villagers was determined to open battle
with the Druzes by first burning the home of the Christian kaymakam.
Such was the news that the Patriarch continued to receive throughout
June, when the Druzes were gaining the upper hand in the war. Still the
situation got worse: refugees streamed in from the Shuf villages occupied
by the Druzes; Mas‘ad appealed to the foreign consuls for immediate food
relief because there was “fear” of “sedition” between the starving Chris-
tian refugees and the Kisrawanites.44
localized violence: breaking the social order
The fear that enveloped the Maronite hierarchy as it helplessly watched
the destruction of one Christian village after another gave rise to myriad
rumors. As the violence escalated and the condition of the Christians in the
mixed districts worsened in June, the explanations given for the disorder,
both by word of mouth and through letters to and from the Patriarch, be-
came increasingly detached from the material world inhabited by the local
population. What began, in other words, as a problem of disorder in
Kisrawan and the rule of “ignorance” in 1859 became by July 1860 an in-
creasingly “clear” conspiracy led by the enemies of the Maronite ta’ifa.
The violence was framed in apocalyptic as well as conspiratorial terms that
had lost all sense of contingency and indeed of ordinary human agency.
Every action, it seemed, was calculated by secret conspirators to divide the
Christians (whether it be an Ottoman effort to disperse the Druzes by fir-
ing cannons at them, which was retrospectively seen as the “signal” for a
general massacre of Christians, or Hurs¸id’s unsuccessful efforts to prevent
bloodshed, which were later interpreted as deliberate foot dragging).45
The belief in plots and mysterious signals, however, obfuscated an im-
portant dimension to the violence of 1860: the involvement of the ahali in
politics not in response to external agitation but as a result of the contra-


[PDF page 146]
128 / The Devil’s Work
dictions of reform. In both Kisrawan (1859) and in the mixed districts
(1860), the main tension lay between a restoration and reinstatement of
privilege (which the notables embraced wholeheartedly) and the liberation
of the ahali from oppression.46 If in Kisrawan the tension manifested itself
primarily as a social struggle because of the demographic reality of a ho-
mogenous Maronite population, it nevertheless relied on religious im-
agery and a sectarian vocabulary. However, in the districts “inconve-
niently” inhabited by a religiously mixed population (to recall the British
characterization of the situation), the tension displayed itself more as a re-
ligious contest, yet one that was heavily informed by a social discourse. In
this sense, the circumstances surrounding the violence of 1860 must be
understood not as conspiratorial but as contingent, not as tribal but as
modern, not as unexplainable but as a comprehensible attempt to purify a
reformed landscape created by the combined efforts of locals, Europeans,
and Ottomans.
What was occurring in the latter part of 1859 and particularly in the
winter and spring of 1860 was a dismantling of the increasingly tenuous
bonds of civility that had in the past bound Druzes and Maronites to-
gether. The random acts of violence that preceded the war in the summer
of 1860 were not simply indications of “anarchy”: they amounted to cu-
mulative blows against any notion of a nonsectarian geography or civility.
The intercommunal violence that followed reflected the desperate struggle
to reconstitute society along pure and segregated sectarian lines. Attacks
took place at night, in secret, and through ambushes. More often than not,
assailants were never apprehended. The killing of a Druze muleteer on a
specific back road was not just a random act of murder—it was a warning
sent to all Druzes of a particular locale that they were at risk. The mutila-
tion of Christians who were deliberately left alive after having their ears
cut off was also a mockery of traditional society and its rituals of justice.
Unlike traditional juridical mutilations—the branding of a face, the cut-
ting out of a tongue, the gouging out of eyes, or the cutting off of an ear—
which reflected the outcomes of a Bourdieuesque distortion of elite rituals
of power and physically marked the end of elite rivalries in which both
parties were known, the goal of the mutilations in 1860 —the cutting off
of both ears—was to inspire fear of the unknown assailants who might
strike at any moment without warning. The mutilations reinforced new
sectarian geographies into which Druzes or Christians (depending on the
area) feared to venture. Equally significant, they revealed new geographies
that were defined communally rather than genealogically. The terror in-
duced by such murders allowed Shahin to position himself as the protector


[PDF page 147]
The Devil’s Work / 129
of all the Christians of Mount Lebanon, regardless of traditional notable
prerogatives.
The killings illustrated— deliberately or not we will never know—the
elites’ loss of control over the situation and their inability to prevent fur-
ther murders. Each seemingly random murder constituted a challenge to
the social order and a declaration that politics was being played according
to new rules. Maronite Bishop Bustani elaborated on this sense of help-
lessness when, in a letter to the Patriarch written in early May, he reported
skirmishes around Shqif, near Hasbayya, that resulted in the death of a
Christian at the hands of a Druze man. Bustani wrote confidentially:
There was tumult [hayajan] among the juhla who were determined to
cause sedition but we prevented them. Emir Sa‘d al-Din Shihab arrested
the known culprit and made him give evidence against his comrades, but
you know how difficult it is to achieve justice in such times for crimes of
murder and, thus, the case has not been resolved; we remain with the
‘uqula [wise ones] of the district [vigilant] in warning the ignorants to
make sure that they give no cause to spark the sedition, either in the in-
side or the outside. During this time, a Druze man was found murdered
near the Hasbayya river, and another Druze man was found wounded
there from the village of Mhaydthat Rashayya. When the search began
for the culprits, the Druze man said that his assailants were [Shi‘a]; nev-
ertheless, the Druzes said the attackers were Christian from the Iqlim,
but disagreed on who exactly to blame. Some said fulan [so and so] did
it, and others said the opposite. We once again warned everyone to avoid
all provocations and instigations of unrest both here and abroad. God . . .
will bring matters to a felicitous end and [prevent] the spilling of much
blood that circumstances threaten to provoke. The signs of destruction
and war are many. Hope that these instigations will subside and hope for
. . . putting out the smoldering embers of the tumult is not high, be-
cause the nature of these misguided people is not to remain still but to
spread the flames of the fire-log. We notice that the Druzes are prepar-
47
ing to light the fuse of war, at least their juhhal.
It was precisely the sheer randomness of the violence that kept the elites
off balance. They never knew where to turn. Sa‘id Janbulat, for example,
wrote letters to the Ottoman authorities and to the Christian elites assur-
ing them that he had managed to restore order in the Shuf, but no sooner
had he done so than a Christian was slain on 26 May by unidentified as-
sailants near ‘Aynab after two Druzes had been murdered near the Beirut
River. According to another priest’s report, news trickled back to the ahali
of Dayr al-Qamar that the Christian was one of their men, so they “turned
on the Druzes [living] amongst them and there was a lot of shooting.”48


[PDF page 148]
130 / The Devil’s Work
When Druze muleteers were found dead at Khan al-Warwar, their families
went to Sa‘id Janbulat, asking him to give permission to kill the murderers
or at least one of the respectable Christian “faces” of Shwayfat. When Jan-
bulat refused to give his permission, they demanded that they at least be
allowed to go beyond the borders of Mount Lebanon to kill any two Chris-
tians. Still Janbulat refused, but the family took matters into its own
hands; waiting in ambush just over Mount Lebanon in the Khan of
Muhammad ‘Ali near Nabatiyya, they saw three Christians and killed two
of them, leaving the third for dead after they cut off his ears.49
The Ottoman governor, Hurs¸id, wrote to the Grand Vizier’s office on 20
May informing him that because of the intrigues of foreign agents “the
age-old enmity [min el-kadim derkar olan . . . adaveti] between Druzes
and Christians in Mount Lebanon” had commenced “with both sides com-
mitting abominable acts like murder.” He described the situation:
The past day between the Sayda and Jba‘ districts there is a place called
Khan Muhammad ‘Ali where three Christians were found murdered;
and although their murderers were not found, the Christians decided
that it must have been the Druzes and so killed two Druzes in the region
of Sayda at a place called Ramlat al-Hajr; a third they left wounded after
they cut off his ears. Despite the fact that we took the necessary precau-
tions as soon as the news was received, when the Druze side heard this,
and when the Druze villagers of Kajluniyya [Kahluniyya] heard of a
Christian priest and two other Christians from Jazzin on their way from
Dayr al-Qamar to Marj Bisri who were said to have molested several
Druze children, they killed the lot of them. Word of this spread here and
there and this created a large sedition between Druzes and Christians.
And although the muqata‘jis took measures to prevent the disorder
from escalating, there is a fear that a further deterioration may take
place. During these times, the transfer of troops of the Arabistan Army
from their posts to Istanbul has given rise to rumors and lies, notably
among the seditious and rebellious Kisrawanites whose hearts have been
boldened by the fact that they have till now remained unpunished. In
Hasbayya and Rashayya, which are in the province of Damascus, this en-
mity [between Druze and Christian] has pushed the Druzes to carry out
their seditious acts however they can, but the energetic actions taken by
[our] officials in accordance with [imperial] duties have contained the
sedition by immediately issuing the necessary warnings and threats in
accordance with the nature of the Mountain people to all sides; in addi-
tion, the sending again of regular cavalry and investigating officers
makes it possible to prevent a further outburst. In accordance to the [im-
perial] wishes, steps have been taken to arrest and punish those who
have been involved in killing and other unsuitable acts, and if you re-


[PDF page 149]
The Devil’s Work / 131
ceive reports from other partes that suggest otherwise, I have taken the
50
liberty to present you with the truth of the matter.
The tone of Hurs¸id’s letter was that of a governor who, having lost con-
trol of the situation, took refuge in a myth of primordial communalism to
explain the violence. He boasted that he knew “the character” of these
“Mountain people.” That it was a new conflict over a sectarian landscape
that had since 1842 imperfectly defined the social and cultural boundaries
of Mount Lebanon was the last thing on his mind. Hurs¸id’s world, like that
of the notables who obeyed him, was one of strict hudud, or limits. The
problem, as far as he could tell, was that Christians and Druzes had “ex-
ceeded their limits,” and the solution, for him, was that each person return
“to his place,” which to Hurs¸id meant both the actual villages of the com-
batants as well as to their supposed standing in society.51 In the midst of
the crisis, he still referred to the Maronite Patriarch as “our friend, the Es-
teemed Patriarch of the Maronite ta’ifa, chief of the Christian ta’ifa and
pride of the Christian millet” as if the Patriarch could control all those who
fought in the name of Christianity.52 The entire authority structure was
hierarchical, and since those immediately responsible to him, the kay-
makams and the muqata‘jis, were not involved with the violence but were
trying to contain it, his own ability to interfere was severely constrained.
The social order that had been disturbed in Kisrawan and that had been
teetering in the Matn since the Bayt Miri incident of 1859 was now in the
process of collapse in the Shuf and beyond, in Hasbayya and Rashayya. But
it would be wrong to suggest that these initial stages of violence were in
any way planned or part of a grand scheme of social liberation. Rather, in
the contested sectarian climate—unstable since the restoration of 1840
and rapidly deteriorating since Kisrawan—the killing of a Druze or a
Christian had far greater ramifications than it would have had otherwise.53
In some cases, as Hurs¸id’s dispatch indicated, the villagers mobilized after a
rumor arrived of the molestation of Druze children; in other villages, a
death had to be avenged. In and of themselves, such incidents were not
new, but in the sectarian climate of partition, where religious identity be-
came paramount in defining not just politics and culture but also geogra-
phy, the killing of a Christian or Druze had implications that rapidly
spread beyond the immediate context of a particular feud or village dis-
pute. A killing was no longer simply a family affair, it was a communal af-
fair; and revenge could be taken not simply on a member of the murderer’s
family or village but on a member of his religious community at large. In
the absence of the old-regime mechanisms of notable politics and social


[PDF page 150]
132 / The Devil’s Work
control, the rumor of the molestation of Druze children by a Christian
priest, who in many ways personified the Christian community, suddenly
became credible. Consequently, even a minor incident could lead to general
violence between Druzes and Christians.
I should make clear here that the cycle of violence, the tit-for-tat
killings, also produced moments when Druzes protected Christians and
Christians protected Druzes. For example, Sa‘id Janbulat appealed to the
Christian notables to hold back their villagers, while he vowed to restrain
his own men.54 When a priest accused of molesting Druze children was
killed by Druze villagers, a Druze man, ‘Ali Ahmad Hasan ‘Abd al-Samad
from ‘Amatur, happened to be in the Christian village of Rum. Under-
standably fearing for his life, ‘Ali Ahmad sought refuge with Hanna Tan-
nus, a blacksmith who was also an agent for the properties of the sons of
shaykh Hammud Janbulat. In the Christian man’s home, ‘Ali Ahmad hid
until he could be spirited away to safety by Orthodox Christians. Simi-
larly, one of the hapless Christian priest’s companions managed to outwit
his Druze pursuers by hiding in the flour mill of the Druze Abu ‘Ali Matar
Abu Shaqra before moving to Fahd Kan‘an Abu-Shaqra’s house. Abu-
Shaqra, in turn, provided him with two Druze escorts to guide him along
back roads to his village.55
Yet for all these acts of compassion, for all these genuine and monu-
mental acts of kindness, the prevailing atmosphere tended toward greater
communal separation and segregation with each additional killing.
Whether in response to this hostile environment or because of it (or both),
young male Christian villagers of the Shuf and neighboring districts fol-
lowed the example set by the villagers of Kisrawan. They began to organ-
ize themselves into militias, each of which was headed by a self-proclaimed
shaykh al-shabab (leader of the young men) and whose followers called
themselves the jahala—which has the same root as juhhal (j-h-l, or “ig-
norance”) but which also evokes a sense of folie de jeunesse, youthful
strength and bravery without heed of the consequences.56 They dressed in
a distinctive fashion, wearing a white shirwal (baggy pants) over which
they wore a loose white shirt, which resembled, according to Abu-Shaqra,
the skirts worn by the Albanian soldiers. And over these, the self-styled
Christian youth brigades covered their legs with red leather and wore caps
on their heads and mandils (head scarves) like those of the Bedouins.57
Their task, quite simply, was to “defend” themselves and “their” land
against feared Druze attacks.
Beyond this task, however, lay a moral aspect to the mobilization of the
young men— or those who aspired to be counted as young men—that


[PDF page 151]
The Devil’s Work / 133
challenged traditional social order. Michael Gilsenan has shown in his
work on the region of ‘Akkar that the shabab in any particular region rep-
resented a gradation in a male hierarchy that separated boys from senior
men, and they were continually tested and judged in their rhetorical and
performative abilities to be young men. Therefore times of conflict, such as
1860, afforded the shabab of the Shuf an opportunity to become the effec-
tive leaders of their community; defenders of village honor, pride, and se-
curity; and the heroes of village legends in the aftermath.58 The organiza-
tion of a distinctly Christian shabab not only repudiated the patriarchy of
Druze notables, and hence the political and moral basis of the old regime,
but it also, in a sense, circumvented and replaced established Christian
leaderships, which were unable or unwilling to fight like “real” men. It
was not for nothing that Tanyus Shahin’s followers told him to either mo-
bilize or become an object of ridicule, that Maronite priests constantly re-
minded their Patriarch of the humiliation the Maronite Church would ex-
perience if the Patriarch did not act decisively, or that individuals risked
their lives in feats of bravado during combat to prove that they were indeed
brave men—such as when Maronites from Kisrawan defied the gauntlet of
Druze musketry to grab sacks of silk that the Druzes had deliberately
placed in open stretches of the road.59
This defiance of the notable social order did not, of course, imply a com-
plete break with all traditional notions of community and subjecthood. The
Christian villagers who rebelled against Druze control underscored their
belief that their actions were legitimated by their status as obedient sub-
jects who were merely recovering rights guaranteed them by the Tanzi-
mat. Under the circumstances, the most important of these rights was that
of protection and security, which allowed them to mobilize against the al-
leged oppressions of their notables. The demographic composition of the
Shuf—where the Druzes outnumbered the Christians—made the Chris-
tians all the more eager to invoke their status as “slaves of the Sultan” in
order basically to cast themselves in the roles of victims in need of imperial
protection from “the Druze Mokattajis [muqata‘jis], [who] during past
times have never been punished or checked by the [government] for any of
their misdeeds and outrages upon us, the slaves of your [government].”60
This was not a tax revolt. It was a repudiation of the Druze-dominated so-
cial order that held sway in the Shuf and the other mixed districts and was
an attempt to establish a more equitable rule under Ottoman sovereignty.
It was one more call in the cacophony of competing Christian claims of lib-
eration that were heard in the years 1859 and 1860. By their very exis-
tence, the shaykh al-shababs declared to the Druze and Christian elites, to


[PDF page 152]
134 / The Devil’s Work
the Maronite Church as much as to the Druze landowners, to the Khazins
as much as to the Janbulats that the ordinary sectarian actor had emerged
in his own right and had bypassed traditional channels of authority to
wage war against the Druzes.
Taken together, these initial episodes of violence, counterviolence, and
resistance to violence underscored that the untenable compromises by the
elites were based on illusions of control over their respective communities.
Neither Bishop ‘Awn nor Sa‘id Janbulat controlled the situation on the
ground. Indeed, the sects they imagined themselves to be leading were of-
ten to be found compromising the integrity of their leaders, defying or-
ders, and generally exhibiting what the elites described as “ignorance.”
The disturbances also revealed the futility of Ottoman efforts to restore
order by directing their attention to the notables, for in fact the common-
ers were often in the vanguard of the violence. Tahir Pasha, for example,
was sent with an expeditionary force to separate the Druzes from the Mar-
onites in early June. He was confronted by a band of Kisrawanites with no
discernible leader. Confused, he ordered Druze notables to keep the peace;
he cajoled and warned them, only to see sectarian clashes erupt soon there-
after.61
More important, the individual murders reinforced a current of fear
that ran though sectarian society. As in the early 1840s, nobody could be
sure who would be the next victim. Despite traditional ties that bound
Druze and Christian families together and despite elite compacts and at-
tempts to restrain the “ignorants,” the initial phase of the violence marked
a demarcation of new sectarian geographies. Areas emerged in which
Christians dared not travel and into which Druzes and other Muslims
feared to venture. Christians and Druzes turned inward, shunning each
other out of an imagined fear that the “other” side was plotting against
them. In the volatile sectarian climate, security was increasingly guaran-
teed by the absence of rival communities. For example, in one village a
small argument between a Muslim and a Christian villager in May imme-
diately produced a rumor among the Christians that the “Muslims were
coming.” Even the efforts of the village priest to dissuade them failed to
prevent the Christians from demanding the expulsion of the Muslim from
their village. Finally, an emir intervened and scolded a deputation of Chris-
tian villagers by telling them that such an action “could not be toler-
ated.”62 Although this incident was contained, with each beating or mur-
der in Mount Lebanon, the complete unraveling of society came one step
closer.


[PDF page 153]
The Devil’s Work / 135
communal violence: violence of liberation
In and of themselves such incidents did not produce communal violence.
Rather they created the conditions within which communal violence could
take place by demarcating the geographies of communal safety and danger.
When full-scale communal war occurred in late May of 1860, however, it
was no longer a “civil” conflict but an attempt to physically redefine the
limits of civility and the boundaries of purity. Shahin and the Maronite
Church, Druze warriors and their notables vied with each other to see who
now represented the “true” Christian or Druze nation. The Druze notables
wrote to the European consuls with precisely this message: “each individ-
ual of the Druzes and Christians is not under the eye of surveillance.”63
Here and there, some notables did what they could to prevent the catastro-
phe. Sa‘id Janbulat, for example, protected the Christian Khalil al-Basha,
who was in Dayr al-Qamar on business from Damascus when the troubles
began; he had written to Janbulat requesting help, and Janbulat “at once
sent us five Druze horsemen and five soldiers and we proceeded by night
to Mokhtara [Mukhtara].”64 Janbulat sent his Christian secretary, Yusuf
al-Khuri, to reassure other Christian villages in and around the Shuf dis-
trict. And when the fighting began, several Christian families took refuge
with Shi‘a notables in Jba‘, although Druze fighters (in one case at least)
stormed such havens, defied the would-be protector, “who was unable to
protect them and was even covered with blood himself,” and killed those
inside.65 Arslan emirs also moved to save Christians, and in Hasbayya, Sitt
Nayfa—sister of Sa‘id Janbulat—was praised by the French consul for her
efforts to protect the wives of Christian emirs.66
Such efforts, however, could not disguise the evident breakdown of
mechanisms of social control during the conflict of 1860. The American
missionary William Thomson described the war as “simply a rising of the
people against the wishes of the ruling classes, on all sides.”67 He was right
to the extent that what transpired on the ground was not a skirmish be-
tween the elites. The great social distinction between high and low that had
been the hallmark of the prereform society was temporarily abolished in
the fighting. To Shahin, to the ahali of Zahla, and to the Christians resi-
dent in the mixed districts, not only were the Druzes obviously beyond the
pale, outside the community of Christians, so too were Christians who as-
sociated with Druzes and the elites who had signed alliances with the
Druzes. The flurry of appeals and calls of distress from one region to an-
other in the days and months leading up to and including the summer of
1860 drew meaning from the context of a struggle over rights and property


[PDF page 154]
136 / The Devil’s Work
in which one’s Christianity was meant to take precedence over one’s social
standing and family loyalties. The ahali of Zahla, for example, issued re-
peated appeals for Christian unity to face the “treachery of the [Druze]
wolves” and despaired at the lack of Christian unity and the Patriarch’s in-
ability to assume leadership in a moment of crisis.68 Communal mobiliza-
tion was an attempt to set up a stable community in which Christian rights
would no longer be guaranteed by the elites, many of whom were per-
ceived to have betrayed the cause of Christianity, but by the actions of the
ahali themselves.
To this end, Tanyus Shahin wrote letters urging the Christians of
Mount Lebanon to support the efforts at liberation of their coreligionists in
the Shuf:
You have doubtless heard of the extreme pressure exercised against our
Christian co-religionists living in the Mountain of the Druzes by the
unbelieving community; I have received repeated and urgent applica-
tions for assistance in order to release them from their bondage for
they are besieged; prompted by that religious zeal which is a sacred
duty, I have hastened to move forward with soldiers, and am now en-
camped on the plain of Antilyas, purposing to march at once to the de-
fence of our co-religionists. You must come in a body immediately and
instantaneously, which knowing your zeal, I am confident you will do.
Your brother,
69
Tanious Shaheen [Tanyus Shahin]
In the process, however, Shahin and his men also looted silkworms be-
longing to Christian merchants in Antilyas, and other Christian bands
threatened to loot silk belonging to Bishop Nicolas Murad. How could it
be, despaired one priest writing to the Maronite Patriarch, “that yesterday
we and the wakils asked them to come to fight with the Christians [while
now] they are confiscating their silk? . . . Our fear is not of the loss of an
uqqa (oke) of silk but of the rising of the Christians against one another at
such a time.”70 The justification that Shahin’s men gave for expropriating
the silkworms of a Christian merchant is that he had allegedly bought the
silkworms from the Druzes. Whether this was true was irrelevant: to
Shahin and his followers it was a legitimate to dispossess the merchant for
he was trading in corrupted—i.e., Druze-produced—goods. While Shahin
was proceeding with his ambivalent war of liberation, in which a strike
against the social order was also a sanctioned blow against the enemies of
the faith and those who collaborated with them, the Christians who lived
among the Druzes opted to liberate themselves from their Druze landown-


[PDF page 155]
The Devil’s Work / 137
ers. Nearly two thousand Christian ahali assembled near Jazzin, marched
on two farms owned by the ‘Assaf shaykhs of Niha, and burned them to
the ground.71 If Shahin and other Christians trespassed social boundaries
in their crusade against the Druzes, then Druze villagers also took advan-
tage of the fluid situation to do what was previously unthinkable: they
killed emirs on a scale never before seen in the history of Mount
Lebanon.72
The murder of seventeen Muslim Shihab emirs in Hasbayya by the
Druzes pointed to the social nature of the violence; while Christians were
being slaughtered after a prolonged siege, the Druzes systematically cut
down every Muslim Shihab emir in the town. Within what was the most
cataclysmic moment of religious violence between Druze and Christian lay
the apparent paradox of Druze turning on Muslim notables; chroniclers
have rightly insisted it was because the Shihab emirs defended the Chris-
tians.73 Yet the massacre of the Muslim emirs emphasized the link between
religious violence and the violation of social order that was the hallmark of
1860. The murder of Emir Sa‘d al-Din, for example, was a brief moment
when the bonds of the old-regime social order, of the prohibition against
killing notables, of subservience, of bowing before the ruling classes were
utterly destroyed. It was a moment when the Druze villager, beyond the
“eye of surveillance” of his Druze lords, legitimated with communal logic
what had been the most heinous of crimes in traditional society: the emirs
were killed not because the Ottoman state had decreed their death, not be-
cause of a rivalry between elites, and not because of a tax revolt or some
other violation of duty or obligation. Rather, they were killed because they
had associated themselves with the Christian enemy. The Druze warrior’s
decapitation of Emir Sa‘d al-Din was a blow to the foundation of the old-
regime social order, which had hitherto linked Shihab and Janbulat. Sec-
tarian violence was freed from the accountability of the old regime, and
thus to call it primordial is to miss one of the fundamental breaks that it
represented. In effect, it was the one instant when the pure communal ac-
tor emerged unfettered and unrestrained by any hierarchy before he sank
back into the web of conflicting and contradictory relationships that de-
fined his daily existence.
The case of the Shihab emirs was one such episode when the “enemy”
was unmasked and physically accessible.74 Perhaps, as historians have of-
ten assumed, the Shihabs were slaughtered because they were responsible
for the exile of many Druze notables (although this theory assumes that
the killer of Sa‘d al-Din and his relatives was motivated by feelings of re-
venge); maybe it was because Hasbayya itself was a traditional seat of Shi-


[PDF page 156]
138 / The Devil’s Work
habite power that had actively resisted the Druze advance. Most likely,
however, it was because the name of the Shihabs had become associated
with the Maronite Church’s attempt to create a Christian Mount Lebanon
which excluded the Druzes. Shahin and others legitimated themselves
through a discourse of Christian rights. It is not surprising, then, that the
Druzes responded by making it a point to destroy sacred sites and figures
associated with the enemy. In addition to murdering the Shihabs, the
Druzes killed priests and burned monasteries wherever the Druzes
emerged victorious. In some cases, if the stories in Christian chronicles are
to be believed, the Druzes made the Maronite priests kneel in churches be-
fore they were hacked to death.75 Near Zahla, the Jesuit residence was sin-
gled out and destroyed; five Jesuits were martyred.
The murder of the Jesuits was particularly significant. Beyond the fact
that Jesuits were actively involved in the war effort and beyond the fact
that churches served as gathering points, as centers of the village as well as
the last line of defense in many battles, certain Christian centers were at-
tacked with such ferocity for another reason— one only hinted at in the
chronicles and reports on 1860.76 Among the torrent of rumors was one
that was heard, and denied, by the French consul in Beirut. There was “a
false rumor” circulating among the Druzes, he claimed, that the consulate
of France has authorized and encouraged the mobilization of Christians.
“Through letters, through speech, and through every means available to
me, I have categorically denied this absurd assertion by the Druzes, and I
hope to restore amongst them respect for our flag and the certainty of our
complete neutrality.”77 This rumor of French and, by extension, Jesuit in-
volvement with the Maronites was an important one in outlining for the
Druzes the boundaries of betrayal. To them, France was an outside power
whose support for the Maronites was interpreted as betrayal. France had
sided with Mehmed Ali against the Syrian insurgents of 1840, and, more
recently, Tanyus Shahin was said to have wrapped himself in a French flag.
Notwithstanding the French consul’s remonstrations, the name of France
was linked to incipient Maronite nationalism. This link was expressed
through the Christians hired in the French consulate, the Christians “pro-
tected” by France, and, above all, the flag of France that fluttered above
bastions of purely Christian spaces in Ghazir, Bikfayya, and Ma‘laqa. Not
surprisingly, the Druzes regarded both native and missionary Catholic in-
stitutions as active promoters of the annihilation of the Druze community
and were, therefore, determined to destroy them.78
At the very moment that the united Maronite ta’ifa failed to emerge,
the Druzes eliminated symbols of Christian power whenever and wher-


[PDF page 157]
The Devil’s Work / 139
ever they came across them. Not content with the destruction of churches
and murder of priests, the Druzes wielded the “sword of revenge” (the
phrase used by Christians giving testimony after the war) to erase all
traces of the Maronites in the mixed districts. A Druze account recorded
many years after the war confessed the following:
And the next day, the two Druze armies—those from Niha and those
from ‘Amatur— carried out an attack against the Christian soldiers but
found not a trace of them anywhere since the entire district of Jazzin was
abandoned. The Druzes then turned their attention to the hideouts of
the Christians and their buried treasures in their homes, and there they
found not a little and they extracted what they could; they set fire to all
the villages and farms in the district, and left them like smoldering lava
whose ashes the wind carried into the air, and thus the vast district be-
came a desolate wasteland where only the crows croak and the owls
79
hoot.
To the Druzes, the total cleansing of conquered areas was not a shame-
ful act to be covered up but a moment of exultation because in an era of
rights based on property, on population, and on representation, the elimi-
nation of the Catholic other was the only guarantee of security. For this
reason, perhaps, the massacre of Christians was so intense and was perpe-
trated with such a cavalier attitude. In the massacre of Dayr al-Qamar, for
example, a Druze shaykh was reported (by a Christian chronicler) to have
sat on a chair in the middle of the street, drinking his coffee, chanting joy-
ously, and smoking from a narghile, while Christian victims were brought
to him one by one and slaughtered in front of him. There was quite clearly
no fear of accountability after the war because what was being fought for
by these Druze warriors was not a modification of the old order of things
but a society without Christians.80 As the Druze chronicler wrote, “The
Druzes returned with their emotions overwhelmed by the intoxication of
victory. . . . In the past, the district was filled with its inhabitants; [1860]
was a time that transformed the inhabited to the desolate and turned what
was into what is not in less than a day.”81 The methodical destruction of
Christian villages had another function, however: laying undisputed claim
to land and property that had been a source of tension since 1840. The at-
tacks against refugees on the open roads and the massacres of unprotected
Christians wherever they could be found signified a desire and a need to
eliminate a fear of the unknown, of a possible reprisal, and of a Christian
alliance (which never materialized).82 But this fear should not be dis-
counted or dismissed as part of an age-old hostility; the fear was not of


[PDF page 158]
140 / The Devil’s Work
Christianity per se but of an exclusivist Maronite sectarian consciousness
in its various (and often contradictory) manifestations—a consciousness
that singularly represented to the Druzes a threat to their way of life and
that contested their control of land. Thus, even as they massacred hun-
dreds of Maronites, the Druzes did not pillage the Protestant church in
Hasbayya; they did not attack American missionaries who were not asso-
ciated with the hostile and aggressive Maronite sectarianism.83 Despite the
fact that it lay within their easy grasp, the Druzes did not sack the village
of Bhamdun but heeded the pleas of the resident American missionary to
avoid bloodshed.84
the restoration of social order
The intensity of the violence diminished drastically after the sack of Zahla
and Dayr al-Qamar, the last major Christian centers in the contested sec-
tarian landscape. The Druzes appeared victorious. The mixed districts “be-
longed” to them; the Christians were paralyzed by their defeat, unable to
find an explanation for their repeated failures on the battlefield and, far
more hauntingly, for their failure to rise as a united ta’ifa against the “un-
believing” Druzes. The Druzes effectively destroyed the legend of Tanyus
Shahin, for he was quite unable to protect his brethren in the mixed dis-
tricts from the nakba, or calamity, that befell them. The Maronite envoy in
Rome, Matta Shahwan, wrote to the Patriarch on 23 June in an attempt to
come to terms with the catastrophe. “The Maronite of the Shuf,” he as-
serted, “is considered to be of a different race by the Maronite of Kisrawan,
and the Maronite of the Jubba is like an apostate in the eyes of a Maronite
from the Matn; . . . [thus] there cannot be hope in the success or reform of
this ta’ifa. Does Your Beatitude think that the foreigner will take pity on
the Maronites after he is apprised of their great numbers compared to the
few of their enemy?” Shahwan reflected bitterly on the Maronite defeat:
Till when will the [Maronites] not wake up from their foolishness; . . .
[till when will they not] realize that they are all one tribe, one religion
and that the honor of one of them is the same as that of another. If faith
unites the Christians as one family, should not the belief in Saint Marun
not force them to be in agreement in thought and action for the common
good. Truthfully, it is a bewildering question, how it is that each of the
ta’ifas appreciated the honor of their ta’ifa in our Mountain except our
ta’ifa, which till today has not yet understood this truth. 85
Following the nakba of the Christians in the mixed districts, the unpro-


[PDF page 159]
The Devil’s Work / 141
tected remaining Christians, terrorized by the Druze atrocities all around
them, had little choice but to give up their dreams of liberation and their
faith in the “truth” of the tribalism of the Maronites. After each episode of
violence in 1860, the same scenes repeated themselves: refugees streamed
toward safe havens, and for those remaining behind appeals were made to
traditional Druze notables, who emerged as the only counterweights to to-
tal communal warfare that in its quest for purity seemed to respect no
bounds and no decency. As a result, Christians took refuge in the values of
the old order, but they never knew if indeed they were going to live or die.
In proceedings before an international tribunal set up after the war to in-
vestigate the massacres, the Christian Salim Shawish from Dayr al-Qamar
testified:
[The Druze] Beshir Bey Meraii Abu Neked was in our house. He came
on Wednesday evening, drank coffee and smoked, and afterwards
supped. After supper he said he must leave. We endeavoured to keep him
for our protection, but he said he wished to go as he wished to save some
persons, and to kill others, namely amongst those whom he wished to
kill Nedder Abu Akker. We bribed him with jewels, watches, silver ink-
stands and other things of value to stay, and thus prevailed upon him to
remain till Mohammed Bey Resslan came and saved us; but he, Beshir
86
Bey, made us give him everything we had of value.
As a result of the violence in Hasbayya, for example, Sitt Nayfa became, in
the words of an embittered Christian chronicler, “the absolute despot over
peoples’ property and lives.”87 Sa‘id Janbulat and Sitt Nayfa, both of
whom personified the old regime, became the only hope for the Christians.
It was an ironic end to a Christian quest that had begun in Kisrawan prom-
ising so much liberation.
When the battles between Christians and Druzes raged in the mixed dis-
tricts, the local Ottoman government reacted with the predictability of an
imperial authority utterly unable to come to terms with the subaltern
movements under way. Torn between his superiors in Istanbul and the
consuls of the Great Powers, Hurs¸id Pasha’s immediate concern was to re-
assure both of them that the situation was under control and amenable to
a quick solution. Although he had presented his resignation before the ca-
tastrophe of 1860 because of the lack of effective force at his disposal,
Hurs¸id remained in office. During the fighting, however, Hurs¸id was par-
alyzed by the total breakdown of Ottoman authority. He was aware, more-
over, that rumors were being spread, designed to “cause panic among im-


[PDF page 160]
142 / The Devil’s Work
perial subjects, . . . about our ill-will towards the Christians and of alleged
Ottoman collaboration with the Druzes.”88 The few unpaid Ottoman
troops stationed in Hasbayya and Dayr al-Qamar were simply in no posi-
tion to prevent the fighting, and when faced with a choice between pre-
venting a massacre and saving their lives, they not surprisingly chose to
save their lives; some even joined in the looting, throwing standing orders
to the wind.89
It was only after the fall of Zahla and Dayr al-Qamar that Hurs¸id felt
confident enough to cobble together a “peace” treaty in July between
Druzes and Christians. The treaty is important not because it restored or-
der—the sectarian conflict had already devastated all available targets—
but because it signaled the first concerted effort by the local government
and the local elites to regain the initiative from the local populace and to
restore a semblance of social order. As such, it served two distinct func-
tions. The first was to reinstate an imperial Ottoman authority over the
natives—to once more draw a clear line between the Sultan’s representa-
tives and the Sultan’s subjects and to reinforce a Tanzimat-era notion of
equal imperial distance from all subjects regardless of religious affiliation.
The second was to underscore the illegitimacy of the popular mobilizations
and to reconsecrate a strict sectarian hierarchy. Together, these functions
conspired to “abolish” the memory of the conflict and, with it, the reality
of transgression of social order and the possibility of liberation.
The first function was premised on the notion forwarded by Hurs¸id to
his superiors in Istanbul that what had occurred was entirely consistent
with the “savage nature” of Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants. By situating the
conflict in a primordial landscape, Hurs¸id exonerated himself and his sub-
ordinates from any wrongdoing. “There is nothing new in the events of
the Mountain,” he informed Istanbul. From the beginning of civilization
until now, he stressed, the natives had been divided into one or another set
of factions and had often been a victim of their own “violent customs
(usul-ı anife).”90 Thus, to Hurs¸id, the violence was an age-old problem to
which the natives were perfectly accustomed. Mayhem and massacre, he
intimated, ran in their veins, which as a knowledgeable official he had re-
alized long ago. Yet his requests for additional troops and freedom of ma-
neuver had fallen on deaf ears, both in Istanbul and among the European
consuls in Beirut, who, he hastened to add, were “totally ignorant of the
ways and manners of the Arabs.”91 The specific context for this latest out-
break of hostility, rather than the violence itself, was what perturbed
Hurs¸id: it was his mission, he wrote to the Grand Vizier’s office, to frus-
trate the designs and influence of “foreign agents.” That was the critical


[PDF page 161]
The Devil’s Work / 143
problem he faced, and bringing about peace was the most effective method
for neutralizing their sinister influence on Ottoman affairs.92
While he tried to calm the fears in Istanbul, where European ambassa-
dors were pounding on the Sublime Porte and demanding an immediate
end to the fighting in Mount Lebanon, Hurs¸id also wrote to the Druze and
Christian kaymakams. He reprimanded the notables of both sides. He in-
formed them that “despite our best efforts and expenses over the past year
and a half, our warnings have gone unheeded and those who love peace and
have reason were not listened to.” He added that “the malicious people
who show no compassion towards women and children together with their
accomplices spread the sedition and thus the Druzes and the Christians
have clashed.” The imperative was to show the natives that he was still in
charge and to make sure they understood that it was out of magnanimity
rather than out of any weakness on his own part that he allowed them to
draw up peace accords “in accordance with the traditions and order of the
Mountain.” Nevertheless, he reminded them that from now on “not the
slightest attack on each other is to be tolerated and that each person is to
return home to his property and land, and involve himself in his own af-
fairs.” From now on, he insisted, any failure on the part of the notables
would lead to severe punishment.93
The buyrultu reinforced the illegitimacy of popular participation in pol-
itics. Its aim was to reinscribe social boundaries, to return, as Hurs¸id was
wont to say, each person to “his place” in society. The first and most strik-
ing aspect of the buyrultu issued by Hurs¸id to the Christian side was its
salutation. In contrast to the fluidity of communal violence, where in
many instances the last became the first, Hurs¸id pointedly prefaced his in-
junction for social order by reinstating the “proper” chain of command.
Thus, the decree was issued first and foremost to the “Pride of the Nota-
bles and those Most Honorable, the Kaymakam of the Christians of
Mount Lebanon . . . Emir Bashir [Ahmad].” Next were the “Proud People
of Rank, the Notables and Muqata‘jis of the Christian administration.”
Then came the “Exemplars of Ideal [subjects], the members of the council
of the Kaymakamate,” followed by the respectable among the people and
finally the general population as a whole. After the preamble, Hurs¸id listed
the numerous “bounties” that the Sultan had issued the ahali of Mount
Lebanon, which allowed them to “maintain their privileges of old.” But in-
stead of appreciating them and praying for the continuity of the Sultanate,
“seducers and obstinate ones” (ashab al-ghayat wa al-‘inad) had put in
place the “foundations of sedition,” which led to the destruction of the
country.


[PDF page 162]
144 / The Devil’s Work
Hurs¸id reminded the assembly that because the ahali listened to the
“ones with the [evil] intentions” (dhawi al-ma’arib) discord was spread in
the “years 57 and 61 [1841 and 1845].” Still, the ahali did not “awaken
from their stupidity and ignorance,” and in these times the “corrupt ones”
desired to stir sedition once more in Kisrawan. They were so bold as to or-
ganize wakils inside and outside of Mount Lebanon, and to promote
shaykh shababs in their activities: these, noted Hurs¸id, were the “princi-
pal reasons for the destruction” that ensued. The ahali were seduced by
corruption and did not listen to the “advice of the wise ones [al-‘uqula’].”
Now that peace had been restored, Hurs¸id added, it was up to “you, the
kaymakam, and you, the notables” to take the initiative to disband all
gatherings of the commoners just as it was incumbent on the “ahali to
submit to their notables and to carry on their own affairs, leaving aside
what does not concern them, and especially, taking heed not to listen to the
seduction of the corrupt ones.”94 Hurs¸id’s vitriol against Tanyus Shahin
was barely concealed. That he did not mention him by name was, in all
probability, because he did not want to sully an imperial decree with the
name of the “rebel” he had repeatedly condemned. But Hurs¸id did not
have to name Shahin. He had made his point, just as Abdullah Pasha had
made it years before: politics and public space belonged to the realm of the
elites, who in turn owed absolute obedience to the Sultan. Those of the
ahali who infringed on it were pawns of shadowy conspirators who threat-
ened good government and public order.
The wording of the peace treaty did not differ significantly. By 12 July
1860, Druze and Christian notables, those who valued and cherished their
“nation,” agreed to peace on the principle of mada ma mada, or to let by-
gones be bygones. The purpose was to ensure “that all that has occurred
from the beginning of the events leading up to the general war until now
shall never become a source of litigation or allegation from either side, not
in the present nor in the future.”95 The peace treaty was, to say the least, a
document of remarkable interest: in the space of a few sentences, inter-
spersed between professions of absolute obedience to the Ottoman state
and prayers for the preservation of Ottoman rule, the elites of Mount
Lebanon conspired to write the ahali out of history. As the elites pressed
their seals to the document, some grumbling, others with relief, they
vowed eternal peace with one another. Of course, they did not believe it.
The Christians, and the Maronite Church in particular, resented having to
sign a peace treaty when the battlefield results placed them in so precari-
ous a position.96 But with the large number of Christian refugees in
Kisrawan and under enormous pressure from the European consuls, who


[PDF page 163]
The Devil’s Work / 145
thought that anything was better than continued bloodshed, the Maronite
notables and clergy reluctantly sealed the treaty.
What they did believe in totally was social order. Thus while they may
have halfheartedly agreed to peace with the Druzes and in private letters
sent to one another may have gnashed their teeth at having to submit to
such a humiliation, they were quite happy to forget the events of
Kisrawan, to forget Tanyus Shahin, and to forget the subaltern movement
they had been grappling with in vain for over a year. Indeed all the nota-
bles, Druzes and Maronites, could at least agree on one thing, that the ig-
norant “mobs” who had dominated politics of late could at last be silenced,
that a civility and “nationalist zeal” among the elites could be restored,
that the “nation” should be taken back from those who showed no pity to-
ward children and from the coarseness of the minds of the “juhhal.” Secu-
lar notables, the Church hierarchy, and especially the Khazin lords who
had been unceremoniously evicted from “their” Kisrawan by the ahali
were only too happy to accept the clause in the treaty which stipulated that
“each person was to return to his place . . . and to take back all his property
and lands as it was in the past.”97 So the clock was turned back, and after
nearly two years of sustained “ignorance” the ahali were instructed to
open their eyes again to a Mount Lebanon in which they were slaves to the
Sultan’s will. In one day they went from being masters—perhaps vile,
bloodstained, ambitious, and unrealistic, but still masters— of their own
destiny to having not the slightest say in shaping the world in which they
lived.
To make sure this was exactly what happened, the Sultan himself took
an interest in his far-off province, whose turmoil had disturbed the equa-
nimity of his being. He ordered his minister of foreign affairs, Fuad Pasha,
to hasten to Syria. Not to be outdone, the European powers decided to su-
pervise the restoration of order by sending their own commissioners to aid
in the investigation of the massacres in Syria. The French even sent an
army after news arrived in Europe that riots had occurred in Damascus
soon after the Lebanese notables had sealed their compact. But that is a
story for the next and final chapter, where the terror of the social order, the
fate of Tanyus Shahin, and the production of knowledge about sectarian-
ism as primordial and antimodern are brought together to conclude this
history.


[PDF page 164]
8 “A Very Old Thing”
F
ew words can express the profound shock that the massacre in Damascus
and the violence in Mount Lebanon produced in Istanbul and in the capi-
tals of the Great Powers of Europe. Stories of rape, the murder of foreign
consuls, and the massacre of missionaries pricked the conscience of Euro-
pean rulers and the reforming Sultan Abdülmecid. In the space of a few
days in July, as rumors of war in Mount Lebanon spread to every corner of
Syria, and amid an economic recession that severely curtailed the region’s
silk and cloth industry, Damascene Muslims, primarily craftsmen and
shopkeepers, rioted and pillaged the Christian quarter of Bab Tuma.1 Al-
though Jews and poorer Christians living in other parts of Damascus were
spared, thousands of Christians were slaughtered in Bab Tuma and hun-
dreds of their houses were plundered. Ottomans and Europeans con-
demned the savage violence of the summer of 1860, but they also ap-
plauded the brutality of Fuad Pasha, who, after agreeing with the European
commissioners on just how many “heads” should roll, inflicted severe
punishment on the Damascenes and on the Druzes of Mount Lebanon in
the autumn of that year.2 They supported Fuad because, quite simply, sec-
tarian violence was deemed primordial behavior that emanated from what
Napoleon III described to his troops (about to embark for Syria) as “the fa-
naticism of a previous century”; the punishment ordered by Fuad was im-
plicitly praised as modern, necessary, and legal and therefore legitimate.3
One, in other words, was seen as an expression of unchanging native
mores, and the other was an example of civility, modernity, and the rule of
law jointly presided over by reforming Ottoman statesmen and European
representatives.4
It is not the purpose of this chapter to dwell on the details of the mas-
sacres and the subsequent tribunal proceedings or to focus on the often ac-
146


[PDF page 165]
“A Very Old Thing” / 147
rimonious imperial rivalries that played themselves out week after week;
nor is it to describe the 357 executions of alleged rioters that took place be-
fore a numbed Damascene public; nor is it to catalogue the hundreds of ex-
iles, the fines, and the conscription that befell the city’s inhabitants.5
Rather, while acknowledging the many differences between the rival com-
missioners and the complexity of the diplomacy that undergirded the
restoration of order in Syria, I focus here on how a knowledge of sectari-
anism as antimodern was produced—how and why the violence of modern
sectarianism in Mount Lebanon was relegated to the domain of tribal fa-
naticism by Fuad Pasha and his European colleagues. Without question,
the horror of the Damascus riots influenced and framed European and Ot-
toman narratives of the rural violence in Mount Lebanon—to the Ot-
tomans, in fact, the Damascus events were far more troubling because of
the city’s symbolic, historical, and religious importance and because the
perpetrators of the massacres were Sunni Muslims. Without question, as
well, both Europeans and Ottomans drew on existing understandings of
Mount Lebanon. The goal of this chapter, therefore, is to illustrate how
Ottoman and European concerns and perceptions coalesced into a discourse
of an avowedly antimodern sectarianism. And, most important, it is to
show how this discourse, which grew out of and justified the terror of pun-
ishment imposed by the Ottoman state in Damascus, masked a final
restoration of an elitist social order in Mount Lebanon and marked the end
of a genuinely popular, if always ambivalent, participation in politics.
the stage of terror
The most important and difficult task Fuad Pasha gave himself was to reaf-
firm the absolute sovereignty of Sultan Abdülmecid in an Ottoman pe-
riphery already incorporated economically, culturally, and even militarily
into European hegemony. Beyond restoring order and minimizing the en-
croachment of the European powers—a task immensely complicated by
the presence of the vainglorious General de Beaufort d’Hautpoul of
France—Fuad attempted to reclaim a monopoly on formal and legitimate
violence from the “ignorant” subjects.6 Among his first acts, in fact, was
warning the Christians of Mount Lebanon in the beginning of October
“that it is not permissible for the subjects to take upon themselves the
right of vengeance, as vengeance and punishment are the prerogatives of
the government.”7
Vengeance and the violence that stemmed from it were within the
purview of the modern state; in place of and above the allegedly “age-old”


[PDF page 166]
148 / “A Very Old Thing”
(kadim ül-cereyan) passions and feuds of its subjects, it was the state, and
more specifically the modern state, that was legitimate in its use of vio-
lence.8 Fuad impressed this simple message on the recalcitrant subjects of
Mount Lebanon. Never for a moment was there any doubt in Fuad’s mind,
nor for that matter in the mind of Halim Pasha, the military commander
in charge of suppressing and “disciplining” the population, that what had
occurred in 1860 did not belong in any way, shape, or form to the modern
world. As one of the great Tanzimat statesmen, Fuad directed his energies
from the outset at trying to reclaim the sullied image of the Empire both at
home and abroad.9 He considered it his duty to represent the “true” Em-
pire—i.e., its center, its reformers, and its Sultan—by excoriating the
“cowardly” local governors who “stained the honor of the Ottoman army”
and by denouncing the “negligent” commanders who “like spectators”
watched the massacre of the Christian subjects in Mount Lebanon take
place before their very eyes.10 This was not simply public posturing to
calm European fears: in confidential dispatches to Istanbul Fuad made the
same point over and over again.11 The modernization of the Ottoman Em-
pire, indeed the viability of the empire itself, was at stake. Fuad insisted
that if nothing were done in the face of the “sedition” in Syria, the Euro-
pean powers would increase their encroachment on Ottoman sovereignty
and the Ottoman state would lose all rights and claims to being a modern
power.
Indeed, although they realized that the French presence in Syria threat-
ened “to bring . . . numerous problems and dangers” to the Ottoman
state, Ottoman officials were aware that the Syrian drama was being
played out on a far larger stage than a provincial one.12 “The world,” con-
fessed Fuad, “awaits the implementation of imperial justice.”13 Fuad saw
the prosecution of the “brigands” (es¸kıyalar) of 1860 as an opportunity to
realign the Ottoman Empire with the concert of Europe; he aimed to steal
the thunder of European criticism of Ottoman “barbarism” by meting out
exemplary modern punishments, for which the European powers and the
sublime will of the Sultan were clamoring.14
In the periphery of the Empire, Fuad made it abundantly clear that the
justification for punishment drew on two separate, yet interlinked, sources.
The first, traditional, was the Sultan’s role as the arbitrator of justice and as
the compassionate ruler. “With great sorrow, disgust, anger and bitter-
ness,” said Fuad to the inhabitants of Damascus, “the Padis¸ah, Hearer of
Justice, has learned of the horrific and abominable acts of murder, plunder
and looting of houses and general assault.”15 The second, however, re-
worked the Sultan’s traditional prerogatives through a discourse of moder-


[PDF page 167]
“A Very Old Thing” / 149
nity. Fuad recast the Sultan’s absolute powers to show how the Tanzimat-
era Sultan, in accordance with the precepts of modern civilization, was
equidistant from all his subjects regardless of their religious persuasion.
He underscored this change in a proclamation issued on 21 September
1860 by claiming that “the cruel treatment that the sedition brought in its
wake in Mount Lebanon on the Christian subjects who are equal in rights
according to the shari‘a [s¸eriat] and the qanun [kanun, secular imperial law
issued by the Sultan] has produced a hurt that aroused the pity of the Im-
perial Majesty, something that is known to all people.”16 Fuad insisted that
punishments drew their legitimacy not simply from the Sultan but from a
modernity to which the Ottoman Empire now laid claim. “Because the
Sublime State never accepts that the slightest harm or aggression should
befall any of the classes of imperial subjects who take shelter under its pro-
tection,” decreed Fuad, “and because the events [that transpired] were con-
trary to the principle of civilization current in the world and beyond the
pale in every manner, the Sublime State, in accordance with its duty to en-
sure justice, has decided to punish those involved in the events.”17
Punishment, therefore, had a moral basis that went beyond tradition.
The instrument of this modern terror was, not surprisingly, the reformed
Ottoman army.18 Historians have often focused on how the Ottoman
army competed with the French army in a race to restore order but have
not seen that an equally important aspect of the deployment of regular
troops was to highlight their modernity and their discipline in contrast
with the alleged anarchy of the natives of Syria. As representatives of
modernity and as equals to the French, the regular Nizam troops deployed
in Syria were exemplars of the modern nation. Fuad reminded the troops:
The ahali of these regions have contradicted the Padis¸ah’s will by caus-
ing sedition and massacres. I have been appointed by our Padis¸ah to be a
commander with you to bring peace and security to this area and to pun-
ish the sins of the group because of their cruel acts. . . . A soldier is the
hand of the Padis¸ah. The Padis¸ah’s hand is justice. He strikes at the op-
pressor. He cares for the oppressed. Let us show everybody what the
worth and value of a soldier is and let all our compatriots
19
[vatandas¸larımız] know our Padis¸ah’s justice.
Without even a hint of irony, Fuad presented an imperial vision of the
Tanzimat to Syria at the point of a bayonet. “Without exception,” he told
the soldiers, “all the imperial subjects are your compatriots [hepsi vatan-
das¸ınızdır].”20 From Fuad’s perspective, the terror about to be unleashed
was professional, orderly, and, above all, redemptive violence sanctioned


[PDF page 168]
150 / “A Very Old Thing”
by state and religion. “In accordance with the law of the s¸eriat [shari‘a],
each of you is required to protect the lives, property, and honor of each of
the imperial subjects without showing any distinction.”21
With Fuad having thus set the stage, reclaimed the image of the Empire
and the mantle of true religion, joined them in a conception of modernity
behind which were, side by side, the Sultan’s soldiers and those of France,
the terror commenced. “Although it seems severe to kill so many men in a
single day, the immensity of the crime and the impact on the world are
such that this kind of great satisfaction and moral punishment are needed,”
wrote Fuad, informing Istanbul of the mass executions of suspected rioters
in Damascus. “It appears inevitable and necessary that for some time [the
city] should be under subjugation.”22 The French concurred, for a Colonel
Osmant admitted by August “that the city is terrified of the Sublime
Porte’s Commissioner.”23 From the standpoint of the inhabitants of Da-
mascus, at least the few notables who left behind a record of the terror as
they saw it, the massacres and the punishments signified a world turned
upside down and a fury that could not be justified by traditional under-
standing. In Damascus, first commoners and then notables were rounded
up, exiled, hanged, and shot. Nobody knew whether their turn was next,
when they would be denounced and hauled off to an uncertain fate. A
Damascene judge’s diary tells of how the exiles were forced to march man-
acled from the early morning till they reached Beirut, where the Chris-
tians taunted them by calling out, “Where are your swords now? They’re
taking you to the hangman’s rope, and tomorrow we are going to Damas-
cus; we have kicked you out and are taking your homes.”24 True or not,
such stories indicated the alienation felt by the Muslims of the city at a
time when the “fear and tribulation increased upon all the Muslims.”25
The Druze shaykhs in Mount Lebanon were forced to flee for their lives af-
ter several among them, including Sa‘id Janbulat, had obeyed Fuad Pasha’s
summons only to find themselves in jail. Those who escaped were hunted
down as “rebels.” Their propery was confiscated, their livestock and wood
commandeered. The Druze district of partitioned Mount Lebanon was
abolished, and the area was put under martial law.26 Torture was report-
edly used to extract confessions.27 Meanwhile, Fuad boasted that hundreds
were arrested in Ottoman raids so efficient that “not even a blade of grass
was disturbed” and “not a pip was heard.”28 The Christians, under the pro-
tection of France, were left untouched.
Nevertheless, in the application of terror the vaunted modernity of
Fuad’s campaign revealed itself to be not nearly as seamless and as orderly
as it might have appeared in metropolitan circles: behind the much ap-


[PDF page 169]
“A Very Old Thing” / 151
plauded punishment of the “savages” of Syria stood the ugly truth of a
systemic violence that the rioters never possessed. It was, at heart, a rather
crude terror intended to silence the population, born not out of a sense of
frustration or alienation but out of a deliberate, imperial policy that set out
to “discipline” the masses of Syria. The terror masked an essentially reac-
tionary goal: to banish the subaltern from politics once and for all and to
reconstitute the broken lines of hierarchy by recovering the meaning of
Europe and the Tanzimat from popular understanding. Given the over-
whelming military might at his disposal and the exhaustion and despair of
the local population following war’s end, Fuad marched into Mount
Lebanon unopposed, indeed openly welcomed by the Christian elites, to
administer justice indeed but also to deliver the deathblow to popular in-
terpretations of Ottoman reform.
the production of knowledge
The most sustained effort to depict sectarian mobilization as part of the
premodern occurred within this context of terror. Discipline and punish-
ment went hand in hand with a production of knowledge about sectarian-
ism that simultaneously absolved the Ottoman state and the European
powers of any responsibility for the troubles and limited the conflict to an
allegedly tribal sectarian landscape removed both physically and tempo-
rally from metropolitan centers. Unlike S¸ ekib Efendi’s and Hurs¸id Pasha’s
solutions to a conflict, which were based on the mada ma mada principle,
Fuad’s goal was not to abolish the past but to make a clean break with it.
The ostensible aim was not to forget the recent violence or to pretend that
nothing had occurred but to punish and to bring some closure to the events
and create a lasting memory of a modern empire in its periphery. Yet the
underlying principle in 1860 was much the same as it had been in 1845: to
restore social order. The goal was to reinscribe the meaning of reform
within a hierarchical conception of a society that flowed, much as the pun-
ishments did, from an imperial center to the periphery in an arbitrary and
absolute manner.29
The course of justice followed a simple formula in Mount Lebanon. Ac-
cording to Fuad Pasha and his European colleagues, the average sectarian
combatant could not have been acting of his or her own volition. Someone,
they felt, must have been behind the violence, for as the British consul re-
marked at the outset of the conflict, “It cannot for a moment be supposed
that a handful of unsupported peasants would venture to defy the author-
ity of the Porte.”30 The ahali acted not out of any awareness or political


[PDF page 170]
152 / “A Very Old Thing”
consciousness but out of a supposedly primordial instinct. The commonly
accepted view among those investigating the unrest was that popular sec-
tarian violence was irrational and instinctive; at best, it was brigandage.
For the urbane and educated Fuad, this belief made sense because it tapped
into—but also went beyond—a classical Ottoman ruling ideology that
equated the good subject with the obedient and quietist subject. For the
ahali to move into the domain of disobedience someone must have ap-
pealed to their simple and savage passions. Fuad’s reports repeatedly ac-
cused the ahali of acting out a “very old thing” (pek eski bir s¸ey) and “an
ancient struggle” (münafese-i kadime).31
Despite the vehement disagreements among themselves over the scale
of punishment and over which side started the war, the European commis-
sioners had to concur with Fuad. The tribunal representatives agreed that
what had occurred in Mount Lebanon “was an inevitable consequence of
the customs of their lands.” Moreover, the British commissioner was ut-
terly adamant about not using a “standard of justice” appropriate to Eu-
rope to evaluate the crimes of “ignorant peasants” who “blindly” followed
the corrupting visions of their leaders.32 Lord Dufferin, the British com-
missioner on the tribunal, confessed that “Syria is inhabited by ten distinct
and uncivilized races, and that these races are split up into seventeen fa-
natical sects.” The “lawless and unruly” Druzes and Maronites, he argued,
were “tribes” whose recent behavior was compatible with their nature.33
The British ambassador to Istanbul agreed. “I think,” he said, “it is not to
be wholly put of sight that if one barbarous people attack another, that
other is likely to repel such attack in a barbarous manner: and that what
passes amidst such people cannot be judged entirely in reference to the cus-
toms, manners, opinions, and civilization of the refined States of the West
of Europe.”34 The Austrian envoy emphatically denied that the Druzes
even had the right to “carry the title of ‘nation.’”35
The commissioners and Fuad Pasha insisted on evoking a tribal land-
scape over which the rationality of modern civilization could not be
brought to bear to justify or explain the violence. This formulation begged
the question of who then was culpable, if not the savage mountaineers.
They agreed on one point, that blame should fall on the elites, although
they disagreed on the differing degrees of guilt that separated the local Ot-
toman government from the local notables and clergy. From the outset, the
Ottoman government maintained that there was simply no evidence to try
the local governor and his administration on any grounds except, possibly,
negligence. Hurs¸id, for example, was accused of having let himself “fall
under the [pernicious] influence” of the locals and was subsequently ban-


[PDF page 171]
“A Very Old Thing” / 153
ished.36 The Turkish governor of Dayr al-Qamar was executed on the
grounds that “he had failed in his duty to repulse by force the plundering,
pillaging and murdering brigands who had attacked the Christians in the
presence of [Ottoman] soldiers.”37 Tahir Pasha, who was sent by Hurs¸id
during the war to separate the two sides, was also interrogated and sen-
tenced to life imprisonment because he was lulled by the “false promises”
of the Druze notables and thus did not immediately disperse the Druze
fighters or the Christians from Kisrawan whom he had encountered.38
Fuad Pasha’s efforts to shift blame (if not ultimate responsibility) for the
events away from the local government left the local elites as the only pos-
sible culprits. They, in effect, became the scapegoats of an imperial wisdom
that could not fathom the idea of rational, autonomous popular activity
that contradicted the entire structure of (theoretically) benevolent and pa-
triarchal Ottoman rule. They also became scapegoats of a colonial Euro-
pean wisdom that refused to accept the popular and reformist character of
sectarian mobilizations and that preferred arguments that were firmly
rooted in a premodern tribal landscape. The local elites and the provincial
Ottoman government were made to pay the entire price for the cata-
strophic consequences that stemmed, in large part, from the European-Ot-
toman decision to partition Mount Lebanon. To a certain extent, this out-
come was to be expected given the presumptions and claims that had been
made over the past two decades by Christian and Druze elites representing
their respective ta’ifas. The outcome was, if nothing else, an ironic process
of accountability in which Druze and Maronite squabbles over the division
of postrestoration spoils came back to haunt them. They were held to their
word and to their self-styled proclamations of being leaders of nations. But
in 1860 their nations had betrayed them in myriad ways: in disobedience,
in their failure to materialize at the right time and at the right place, in the
excesses they committed, and in their general uncontrollability. Fuad
claimed that the Maronites “under the influence of their spoiled [by kind
treatment] and notoriously self-serving spiritual leaders” began the con-
flict by attacking the Druzes and the local government.39 The British, for
their part, denounced what they saw as the intrigues of Bishop ‘Awn,
whom they accused of being an “unscrupulous Prelate, whose ambition
and passion for intrigue verify one’s conception of the worst specimen of a
medieval eclesiastic.”40 And yet it was not the Maronite priests who were
brought to trial but the Druze notables; they were left without any effec-
tive patron to shield them from the terror of imperial justice.
Their punishment, in fact, was based on an 1858 Ottoman penal code
that had been copied from a French code.41 The logic of the Ottoman code


[PDF page 172]
154 / “A Very Old Thing”
itself made it necessary to pinpoint the “ringleaders” of the seditious
movement. Sa‘id Janbulat, for example, was condemned to death on ex-
actly these grounds: “Because of the events that transpired in the Moun-
tain [Lebanon], Sa‘id Janbulat, the Druze emir on trial . . . despite his de-
nial of the crimes attributed to him has been found [guilty] of attacking
subjects of the Ottoman State and of putting himself in a state of rebellion
having led the rebels, and thus according to articles 55, 56 and 57 of the Im-
perial Penal Code he has been sentenced to death.”42
Without question, the Ottoman prosecution of what Fuad called the
“véritables diables” elaborated on a venerable discourse of the Druze as
brigand.43 But it reworked this discourse by emphasizing the legal basis for
their prosecution, which lay in a regularized body of laws that were appro-
priated from one of the great modern nations of the day. The articles
specifically mention the “causing of sedition” or “instigation” and “incite-
ment” as reasons for punishment. Because of these crimes, Sa‘id Janbulat
had placed “himself in a state of rebellion” against the Ottoman state.
Nothing could have been farther from the truth as far as Janbulat was con-
cerned. But the importance lies not in the truth of these accusations but in
their emergence at all. Fuad reminded the Ottoman commissioner at the
tribunal that “the heads which must fall . . . are those of men, who because
of their social standing, exercised a grievous influence on the masses, or
who, because of the sheer number and atrocity of their crimes, caused the
most harm to humanity.”44
The trial and punishment of the Druze notables, furthermore, went a
long way toward satisfying what Fuad described as the “public conscience
of the civilized world.”45 It restored the metaphor of sultanic benevolence
so rudely violated in the tumult of 1860. It reassembled a broken social or-
der. Most important, it affirmed Fuad Pasha’s unshakable view that be-
longing to and being part of a modern Ottoman society, or hems¸ehrilik
(literally, compatriotship), meant embracing social order, accepting one’s
station in life, and bowing without question before the will of the Sultan.
What put Sa‘id Janbulat “in rebellion” was his dereliction of duty and of
his responsibility to restrain and control his followers. The other Druze
notables were accused of the same crimes and indicted under the same ar-
ticles. Husayn Talhuq was condemned to death because although he was a
muqata‘ji and was “therefore required to protect the Christians of his dis-
trict and to prevent the Druzes of his district from engaging in aggression,
he, on the contrary, was found to be a leader of the seditious and rebellious
groups who attacked the subjects of the Sublime State.”46 Implicit in all
these accusations, but spelled out clearly in the reports and memoranda


[PDF page 173]
“A Very Old Thing” / 155
that led up to the punishments, was a conviction that the ahali’s entrance
into politics was necessarily primordial rather than conscious, manipulated
rather than autonomous, and conspiratorial rather than spontaneous.
It was one thing to believe in an elite-led movement, to blame the spir-
itual leaders of the Maronites and to prosecute the Druze notables, but it
was another thing to prove these charges, especially given the flat refusal
of the Druze leaders to acknowledge any responsibility for what had oc-
curred.47 The gathering of evidence, therefore, was a crucial step in the
production of knowledge about sectarianism as a primordial current ma-
nipulated by Druze notables to terrible effect. This insistence on evidence
again seemed to highlight the distinction that Fuad was desperate to un-
derline between modern, legal, and methodical punishment and tribal
“sedition.” Yet the procurement of evidence also demonstrated the reac-
tionary nature of modern punishment. The interrogation of Druze nota-
bles and local officials exemplified the logic of a few men, who were con-
vinced of the existence of an elite conspiracy that would explain the
resurgence of tribal passions. These men framed the entire proceedings
around a single question: who was the ringleader of the conspiracy? As
stated by the tribunal itself, their aim was “to investigate the origin and
causes of the events of which Syria was a theatre; to determine the respon-
sibility of the chiefs of the insurrection, as well as the agents of the [local]
administration, and to proceed with the punishment of the guilty.”48
To this end, man after man was arrested and hauled before two separate
tribunals, an Ottoman military court martial that dispensed justice in the
name of the Sultan and the international tribunal that was meant to over-
see and help in the investigations. Summoned before Turkish officers who
hailed from the highest echelons, before a foreign minister whom they
knew of by name but had never seen, and before European commissioners
including Lord Dufferin, who at the age of twenty-one assumed himself to
be an expert on the affairs of “tribal” Syria because he had spent some time
shooting crocodiles on the Nile, the Druze notables and local officials came
face to face with an uncertain fate.49 When the local officials and Druze no-
tables were interrogated before these men, the questions were none too
subtle. For example, Ahmed Efendi, the emlak müdürü (director or prop-
erties and real estate, bailiff) of Beirut, was asked bluntly why he held “se-
cret meetings” with Vasfi Efendi, who was the kethüda, or secretary, of
Hurs¸id Pasha.50 He was also asked why he had misled “the Pasha by sug-
gesting to him to go to Hazmiyya and not to fire on the Druzes.” To such
a line of questioning, Ahmed Efendi could only exclaim: “A person like
Hurs¸id Pasha cannot be deceived. Who am I to lead him into error? The


[PDF page 174]
156 / “A Very Old Thing”
Pasha was not a newcomer to government. He had been here for three
years. He had absolutely no need for my advice. I neither advised him to
go to Hazmiyya nor did I tell him not to fire on the Druzes.” His denial
notwithstanding, Ahmed was stripped of his rank and imprisoned, having
been found guilty by the Ottoman tribunal of giving “moral support” to
the Druzes based on the testimony of Christians and of the European con-
suls.51
The Druze notable Husayn Talhuq’s interrogation sheds even more
light on the desire of the commissioners to uncover the alleged conspiracy.
Talhuq was asked, “Why did you not prevent the Druses of your
Mookataah [muqata‘a] from taking part in the civil war of the Lebanon?”
The Druze notable denied involvement. “We never left our Mookataah,”
he replied. The commissioners said, “You must have known, as a Mook-
tagee what the feeling of the people was before the civil war broke out.”
Talhuq, drawing on a wellspring of old-regime language, answered that
“all the people of our Mookataah being farmers, they entertain no opin-
ions.” In reference to a separate incident, the court demanded to know why
Talhuq carried arms during the war. “How could I go about without my
arms, especially when the Christians had two days before killed two re-
spectable Druses?” Frustrated, the court asked, “Have you never been
present at any battle?” Talhuq said he hadn’t. “Who were the chiefs [ring-
leaders] of the Druses on the occasion?” asked the interrogators. “They
had no chiefs,” was all Talhuq would say. He was condemned to death.52
When it came to Sa‘id Janbulat, the Ottoman investigators left no stone
unturned. Yet all they came up with was a letter written by Janbulat urg-
ing the Christians of Jazzin to stay calm because he would protect them, as
well as promises—retrospectively seen as deception—he had made to
Tahir Pasha and other officers to maintain order.53 The most damning piece
of “evidence” they found against him was his association with the leader of
the Hawran Druzes, Sa‘id Atrash, who had been received by Janbulat dur-
ing the fighting.54 Failing, however, to find any direct evidence that impli-
cated him in the massacres and confronted by the fact that Janbulat had
procured for himself testimony of good conduct from both Christian vil-
lagers and Ottoman officers during the war of 1860, the Ottomans turned
to the naturally embittered Christian refugees. Homeless and destitute,
women and old men accused Janbulat of having organized their expulsion
from Mount Lebanon. They swore that whatever testimony Janbulat pos-
sessed had been gained from them under duress.55 While the Christian tes-
timony against Janbulat was entirely understandable and may even have
been credible, the testimony of two Ottoman officers after the war was not


[PDF page 175]
“A Very Old Thing” / 157
credible. Although these officers had given previous testimony in favor of
Janbulat, and although Hurs¸id Pasha had earlier acknowledged Janbulat’s
efforts in trying to reestablish order, the officers suddenly decided,
doubtlessly under pressure from Fuad Pasha, that they had been coerced
and deceived by Janbulat.56 Both men turned in identically worded retrac-
tions of their previous testimony.
Regardless of the source of the evidence brought to bear against him,
Sa‘id Janbulat was found guilty in large part because of his rank as the
“foremost and most esteemed” (en büyük ve mu‘teber) Druze notable.57
His death sentence, more than any other, was symbolic of the Ottoman ap-
proach to the conflict of 1860: social standing was equated with knowledge
and therefore with culpability. The approach of Fuad and the international
commissioners had been from the outset to find the “guilty” persons who
had allegedly caused the fitna, or sedition. In the Druze notables, especially
in Sa‘id Janbulat, who was to die in jail, they found their scapegoats. Be-
cause of their social position rather than any actual crimes they had com-
mitted, these men were made to expiate the sins of others and absolve the
Ottoman state and the European powers of any responsibility.
ending kisrawan
Ottoman justice was expressed through the metaphor of the Sultan’s pain
and sadness. Punishment of guilty notables and local officials, including
Hurs¸id, who was banished, was meant to cure society of an inner illness, of
the lapse of the higher, thinking, and rational classes in controlling the
supposedly unruly, ignorant, and irrational lower ones. Punishment was
aimed at redrawing the social boundaries that divided notables from the
ahali. It was meant to emphasize that a healthy, modern nation could and
would compete with Europe not simply in the military and bureaucratic
spheres (the Tanzimat army and Fuad Pasha being embodiments of these)
but also in a moral sphere, for the pain “felt” by the Sultan affected more
than his traditional Muslim identity—it accentuated his newer Tanzimat
identity as a monarch among monarchs in a civilized family of nations. In
the final analysis, punishment was supposed to restore societal balance in
much the same way as Hurs¸id Pasha’s mada ma mada treaty was—with
one crucial difference, namely that the violence was to be put in the past,
while society moved forward. To accomplish this process, each person was
to return to his occupation, to resist the temptation of evildoers to join in
future sedition, and to wait for and obey imperial proclamations when they
were issued.58


[PDF page 176]
158 / “A Very Old Thing”
Nowhere was this more evident than in Kisrawan. Together despite the
mistrust that would normally have pushed them far apart, the Ottoman
state, the European consuls, and the local elites jointly turned their atten-
tion to dealing with the final impediment to a full restoration of social or-
der. Tanyus Shahin himself was never mentioned by name by Fuad. In-
stead the movement in Kisrawan which Shahin led, like the sectarian
violence that followed it, was removed from the world of modern con-
sciousness and banished to the realm of the irrational. Described, instead,
as fevza (anarchy) and heyecan (excitement) by the Ottoman government,
the Kisrawan rebellion was first stripped of its social meaning and then
crushed militarily.59 Moreover, the Maronite Patriarch, backed by the
might of two armies and the ambition of Yusuf Karam, a Christian notable
appointed as a temporary kaymakam by Fuad Pasha, suddenly found the
courage to threaten excommunication of the impoverished Maronites who
still refused to give the Khazins back their property.60
In truth, however, Shahin’s position was already precarious. He was
surrounded by a destitute population of refugees for whom he could do
nothing, a clergy that had long since lost patience with him, notables who
detested his very name, and an Ottoman state that refused even to utter it.
Shahin personified the wilting of a popular movement. A victim of his own
pretensions, a leader of a phantom Christian army and an even more elu-
sive Christian ahali, Shahin accepted Bishop ‘Awn’s urging to end the
Kisrawan rebellion. Accordingly, the bek and the representatives of the
major villages in Kisrawan together solemnly declared on 29 July 1860
their absolute submission and obedience to the Sultan’s will. In and of itself
this declaration was not new—for they had never considered themselves
rebels against the state—nor was their insistence that the Khazins were
free to return to their properties. What was new was their total repudiation
of the legitimacy of their popular movement, which they now referred to
as a course of sedition foisted on them by insidious “men of corruption.”61
Yusuf Karam’s move in March of 1861 to oust Shahin from Kisrawan was,
therefore, a fitting end to a drama that had seen, over the past two years,
common people appropriate the meaning of reform in the cause of social
liberation.62 Karam marched on Rayfun, and, after a skirmish with
Shahin’s partisans, he occupied the village and looted Shahin’s home. The
erstwhile leader of the Kisrawan revolt fled.63 Three weeks later, during
General de Beaufort d’Hautpoul’s tour of Kisrawan, Shahin resurfaced to
beg the French commander to intercede on his behalf with Karam. He was
willing to submit unconditionally. He was tired, a pathetic shadow of his
former self and stripped of what once appeared to be limitless bravado. The


[PDF page 177]
“A Very Old Thing” / 159
general obliged, and under the auspices of the French Lazarists a reconcili-
ation was held between Shahin, the muleteer wh had help turn a world up-
side down, and Karam, who sought to restore things right side up. Under
the watchful eye of France, the two men agreed to forget the past.64 One
might say two visions were represented that day, one of reinvigorated elites
keen to put the memories of the Kisrawan rebellion and 1860 behind them
and eager to regain their “rightful” share in local politics, and the other of
a spent populace that was unsure of its place in postwar society and unable
to remove itself from the shadow of 1859 and 1860, where it had enjoyed
its finest, yet saddest, hour.
defining a culture of sectarianism
The story of sectarian violence in Mount Lebanon came to a close with the
reestablishment of social order. After considering a number of proposals,
including the mass transfer of Druzes out of Mount Lebanon, the Euro-
pean commissioners and the Ottoman government finally agreed on the
creation of the Mutasarrifiyya of Mount Lebanon on 9 June 1861. The par-
tition decision of 1842 was rescinded and replaced by a proclamation of an
autonomous government that would be ruled by a non-Lebanese Christian
governor answerable directly to the Sublime Porte.65 On the face of it, the
rank of muqata‘ji was abolished. What the Ottoman authorities consid-
ered to be the most corrupt facet of notable society was finally, on paper at
least, destroyed. “All are equal before the law” read the sixth article of the
protocol. Measures were taken to combat administrative corruption, create
an efficient and professional police force, and rationalize taxation.66
In more than one sense, the solution defined the problem at hand.
Given to bouts of supposedly primordial intercommunal violence, outside
the mainstream of Sunni Ottoman society, the ahali of Mount Lebanon
were nevertheless protected by Europeans and, as a result, were different
and more privileged than subjects in other Ottoman provinces. Unable to
ignore European interest in this “special” province, the Ottomans hoped to
show that their role in Mount Lebanon would henceforth be that of an ac-
tive modernizer; they would rule the province directly rather than leaving
it to the mercies of corrupt local elites. The creation of the Mutasarrifiyya
was a declaration of Ottoman intent to seal off the wellsprings of alleged
tribal discontent. Fuad Pasha intimated as much when he tied the promul-
gation of new rules in Mount Lebanon to security, public order, and the
government’s devotion to “stability and progress” (sebat ve terrakisine
dahi hasr-ı ikdam-ı tamm olunmakda).67 That the governor had to be


[PDF page 178]
160 / “A Very Old Thing”
Christian and that the European powers had to agree to his appointment
did not contradict the thrust of Ottoman administration. Rather, it reaf-
firmed what was evident from the outset of Fuad Pasha’s mission, namely
the desire to work in tandem with the Europeans to bring civility and
modernity to an allegedly unmodern province. This task was embodied in
Tanzimat laws and was representative of an Ottoman sovereignty playing
on a world stage. The presentation of the proclamation of the Mutasarri-
fiyya symbolized this task perfectly. There, on the tenth day of Muharram,
Thursday, 18 July 1861, having summoned the local elites and notables and
invited the European consuls—albeit only with the rank of “mere specta-
tors” (cümlesine bir seyirci rengi verilmek)—Fuad Pasha “made under-
stood” (tefhim ve is¸aat olunarak) the meaning of the new order of
things.68At the ceremony, Turkish-speaking Ottoman officials, flanked by
French, British, Austrian, Prussian, and Russian representatives, had the
proclamation read in Arabic to the assembled crowd of notables and es-
teemed “faces” of local society. All was ordered. All was deliberated be-
forehand, methodical, absolute, and without any doubt or contradiction.
All was, needless to say, in stark contrast to the perceived anarchy on the
ground that led to the creation of the Mutasarrifiyya.
It was a spectacle that launched a new culture of sectarianism, marred
only by the wailing of Christian widows, who reminded those gathered of
the urgency of their self-appointed task to steer Mount Lebanon toward
modernity.69 Notables, European consuls, and Ottoman dignitaries joined
together in an impressive display of pomp and circumstance that quite lit-
erally reconstituted the lines of social order. Once more, the Ottoman state
positioned itself as the only legitimate mediator between different social
and sectarian communities and, more crucially, as the only legitimate in-
terpreter of the meaning of reform. The occasion coincided with the ascen-
dance of a new Sultan to the throne, which helped underscore the rebirth
and renewal of Ottoman power.70 More than ever before, Ottoman au-
thority—personified in the persons of Fuad Pasha and Davud Pasha, the
first governor of the reorganized province— distanced itself from the ordi-
nary inhabitants who had been so bold as to conflate the reformation of the
Ottoman Empire with social and communal liberation. Their duty, stated
the new governor, was to return to their station in society. Otherwise, they
would be faced with the terrible power of the Ottoman state.71
Outside Beirut, Fuad Pasha turned over the reins of absolute power to
Davud. An Armenian Catholic who had been educated in a French school,
had studied jurisprudence, and had joined the foreign ministry, Davud
was, like his superior, Fuad Pasha, an Ottoman personification of the Tan-


[PDF page 179]
“A Very Old Thing” / 161
zimat. Fluent in French, German, and, of course, Turkish, Davud Pasha
spoke little Arabic.72 Furthermore, his mandate was given without the
slightest input from or regard for the wishes of the imperial subjects, who
were quite simply presented with the fait accompli of the new Mount
Lebanon. Davud was a Christian indeed, but one who embodied official Ot-
toman thinking, which refused to acknowledge a popular basis or dimen-
sion to reforms.
If nothing else, the Mutasarrifiyya was exact. The Règlement Or-
ganique gave precise borders to the new province, which was to include six
separate districts. The first was the Kura district, whose inhabitants were
mostly Orthodox Christians. The second was the northern part of Mount
Lebanon that lay between Kura and Nahr al-Kalb (i.e., Kisrawan). The
third was Zahla and its environs. The fourth was the Matn and the Sahil,
inhabited mostly by Christians. The fifth was the area south of the Beirut-
Damascus carriageway up until Jazzin, and the sixth was Jazzin and Iqlim
al-Tuffah.73 In short, a new map was created that finally erased the ge-
nealogical geography of the old regime. In addition, the fourteenth article
of the proclamation stipulated that any person convicted of committing a
crime outside Mount Lebanon who sought refuge within Mount Lebanon
would have to be turned over to the appropriate authorities. The implica-
tion was clear enough: the article undermined one facet of the notable
privilege of hospitality, which had long irritated Ottoman governors chaf-
ing at their inability to apprehend those whom they saw as “brigands.”74
Scholars have rightly emphasized the centralizing aspect of these mea-
sures and the significant ruptures with the past that they heralded. They
see 1860 as a break, a natural demarcation of historiography that signified
Mount Lebanon’s full incorporation into imperial politics and a world econ-
omy.75 However, by focusing entirely on the new administrative or eco-
nomic aspects of the Règlement Organique, historians have overlooked the
continuity inherent in the document and in the intent behind its produc-
tion. By the admission of its own crafters, the Règlement was meant to be
the climax of a period of flux and a reconsecration of the sectarian order set
in place in 1845. Faced with the contradictions and ambiguities of S¸ ekib
Efendi’s regulations, the Règlement tried to create a rational, workable,
and, above all, elitist sectarian system.
Every article in the Règlement indicated that this new order was to be
sectarian. European and Ottoman diplomats responsible for drawing up
the Règlement attempted to separate the population as much as possible
and, as is evident in the fifth article of the Règlement, to create religiously
homogenous administrative units. In the wake of the 1860 war, the com-


[PDF page 180]
162 / “A Very Old Thing”
bined wisdom of the European and Ottoman negotiators, who spent long
hours in Istanbul belaboring each and every point of the Règlement, forced
on the inhabitants a single public identity, where one’s sect defined one’s
involvement in the public sphere and one’s ability to be appointed to office,
to govern, to collect taxes, to punish, even to live and exist as a loyal sub-
ject. A census was ordered, in accordance with the seventeenth article of
the Règlement, to be carried out “place by place, and sect by sect.”76 Thus
the significance of the often-cited sixth article, which stated that “all are
equal before the law, and all privileges, including those of the muqata‘jis,
are abolished,” is not, as is often assumed, that it abolished so-called feu-
dalism. Rather, it attempted to juridically replace a nonsectarian elite cul-
ture with a sectarian one that emphasized the important role that disci-
plined, reformed, and coopted elites could and indeed had to play in the
process of restoring an Ottoman social order.
Notable society survived its own formal abolition; it persisted and even
developed a new and modernized form which still dominates Lebanon to-
day.77 The Règlement explicitly excluded popular elements from govern-
ment by stating, in the eleventh article, that “all members of the courts
and administrative assemblies will be chosen and appointed by the leaders
of their sect in agreement with the notables of the sect.”78 By a sleight of
imperial and colonial hand, with the full approval of the notables, and
dampened only by the reluctance of the Maronite Church to abandon its
invented “tradition” of a Maronite Shihabite dynasty, an elite political cul-
ture was reconsecrated.79 Indeed, the only legitimate form of public exis-
tence for the majority of Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants was as deferential,
obedient, passive, tax-paying imperial subjects.
The irony, of course, is that the Ottomans never intended for this sec-
tarian order to become a nationalist blueprint. When Fuad Pasha remarked
that “all must, as an individual or a sect, carry out the duties of fraternity
and those of the nation,” he was referring to the Ottoman state.80 The Rè-
glement was a weapon against the disease of separatist nationalism— or, in
the case of Mount Lebanon, what was perceived to be the destructive will
to tribalism—that was steadily eating away at the periphery of the empire
before Fuad’s eyes.81 Time and again he reminded the local inhabitants that
the new order was unveiled “to encourage unity and love of the nation.”82
Time and again, he insisted that the notables must “go to [Davud Pasha]
and must strive to fulfill their duties of loyalty and obedience in carrying
out the orders of the Sublime Sultanate.”83 Fuad Pasha assumed that the
sectarian arrangements could, if needed, be fine-tuned in Istanbul; he
hoped that a link between center and periphery would ensure that the im-


[PDF page 181]
“A Very Old Thing” / 163
perial subjects always had a recourse beyond local power brokers and
would check elite ambitions. The new order of Mount Lebanon was a
showcase of the Tanzimat, insofar as it presented only one centralized un-
derstanding of reform. Not surprisingly, local interpretations of the Tanzi-
mat, as well as popular participation in politics, which were at the heart of
the recent events, found their diametric opposite in the absoluteness, the
distance, the authority, and the order personified by Fuad Pasha in the af-
termath of 1860.
Underlying the Ottoman restoration of order was a refusal to acknowl-
edge any implications that may have been lurking within the tangle of sec-
tarian mobilizations for the course of imperial reform and, ultimately, for
citizenship in the Empire. The edict that announced the new order in
Mount Lebanon boldly asserted that Fuad Pasha had succeeded in “erasing
the traces of the painful event” of 1860.84 This Ottoman exercise in delib-
erate amnesia—which presumed to represent and silence thousands of im-
perial subjects whose lives and memories were obviously and indelibly at-
tached to the events of 1860 —was motivated, no doubt, by a genuine
attempt to rebuild trust and to lay the foundations for a cohesive society.
But it also reflected an untidy effort to sweep under the rug all the contra-
dictions of modernity in an age of European hegemony. Fuad Pasha re-
turned to Istanbul and left the inhabitants of Mount Lebanon (and the Ot-
toman governors sent to rule them) to sort out the complexities of reform
and to reconcile the tensions between communal and individual represen-
tation, religious and social equality, and European power and Ottoman
sovereignty. Mount Lebanon enjoyed a “long peace” (as Engin Akarlı puts
it) under Ottoman stewardship that lasted until the First World War. But
it was a peace constrained within an inherently unstable and highly am-
bivalent sectarian culture.
In the aftermath of 1860, a culture of sectarianism developed in the
sense that all sectors of society, public and private, recognized that the war
and the massacres marked the beginning of a new age—an age defined by
the raw intrusion of sectarian consciousness into modern life. At a public
level, the discourse of sectarianism permeated all facets of administration,
law, education, and, finally, with the establishment of the Lebanese repub-
lic, the state. Mount Lebanon continued to be haunted by the possibility of
renewed religious violence, and consequently there emerged a political cul-
ture determined to “forget” the trauma of 1860. This culture depended,
and still depends, on a myth of communal homogeneity—that there is
such a thing as a Maronite or a Druze nation that can or should be repre-
sented—and on a myth of traditional religious tolerance and harmony, all


[PDF page 182]
164 / “A Very Old Thing”
the while minimizing or ignoring the fact that such harmony undergirded
an utterly rigid and often violent notable hierarchy. Paradoxically, this cul-
ture reproduces and justifies itself as a “balance of communities,” but it
also witnesses repeated contestations (at both elite and popular levels) over
the control, and hence meaning, of each sectarian community.85 The cul-
ture of sectarianism dominates, as well, the private world of citizens. It en-
compasses, beyond the eye of state surveillance, a range of aspirations,
fears, and beliefs that as often contradict as reinforce the public culture of
sectarianism. It forces all citizens to make a basic choice, either to resist or
to support sectarianism— either to believe in a past that allows for the pos-
sibility of coexistence or to believe in a past that forever denies it. The well-
known Syrian intellectual, writer, and educator Butrus al-Bustani com-
posed a series of anonymous pamphlets which appeared in Beirut signed
by “one who loves the nation.” In these pamphlets, entitled Nafir Suriyya
(The Clarion of Syria), Bustani repeatedly stresses the need to come to
terms with the catastrophe of 1860, to punish perpetrators and thereby
bring a sense of closure and healing for the victims, but at the same time to
recognize the underlying causes for conflict and remedy them. He repeat-
edly calls for a secular education and civilization to confront the sectarian
legacy and memories of 1860. He makes the point that man is not sectar-
ian by nature or impulse but by education and socialization.86 In his mem-
oirs, Mikhayil Mishaqa is at pains to depict what pious Muslims did in Da-
mascus to protect and save Christians; he celebrates and reflects the
richness of a multicommunal society.87 For every Bustani and Mishaqa,
however, there are others who refuse or are unable to accept that there is
such a thing as a good Muslim or Druze or Christian. These are men and
women who “remember” (or are made to remember) the harrowing sto-
ries of their grandparents and great-grandparents draw little comfort in
their proximity to the “enemy” community. Precisely such anxieties and
memories, whose veracity is completely beside the point, thrive in a cul-
ture of sectarianism.
If the story of sectarianism has been told here with any depth, it has
been with the modest hope of showing that it is anything but a primordial
identity, that sectarianism has not somehow cheated the course of history.
A little more ambitiously, the point has been to illustrate how and why
sectarian identities were constructed and how they were understood at a
particular historical juncture. The goal has been to delve into this juncture
to illuminate the contradictions and layers of these identities. Without Eu-
ropean colonial imagination, missionary activity, and Eastern Question


[PDF page 183]
“A Very Old Thing” / 165
diplomacy, there never would have been sectarianism. Indeed, without Ot-
toman reform, there never would have been sectarianism. But, most im-
portant, without local participation, beliefs, hopes, desires, and fantasies of
the possible, there would never have been sectarianism. There has never
been a pure sectarianism, only narratives about its purity.


[PDF page 184]
Epilogue
The first time as tragedy, the second time as farce.
Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
Sectarianism as an idea and as a practice belongs to the realm of the mod-
ern. If Ottoman modernization and European colonial influence set the
stage for the beginnings of what I have called the culture of sectarianism in
the nineteenth century, it was in the twentieth century, specifically with
the creation of nation-states, that the term sectarianism—ta’ifiyya—was
coined to suggest a state of being antithetical to modern national develop-
ment. It signified (and indeed only makes sense as) the opposite of a na-
tional mythology of coexistence—ta‘ayush—which could unite all citi-
zens regardless of their religious backgrounds.1 The result has been a
nationalist understanding of sectarianism— especially at an official
level—as an illegitimate and divisive force, more a deviancy than an au-
thentic expression of a specific historical experience. Sectarianism, more-
over, has been depicted as a monolithic force, unchanging in the face of his-
tory, while the nation-state has been viewed as the culmination of history.2
The truth of the matter, however, is quite the reverse: sectarianism was
produced. Therefore it can be changed. Nineteenth-century sectarianism
was a multilayered process that presaged the nationalist era. Sectarianism
was not the failure or corruption of nationalism or the nation-state in the
Third World; rather, if one were to look at it with hindsight, it was
Lebanese nationalism’s specific precursor, a formulation of new public po-
litical identities which eventually came to find their fullest expression, as
well as their deepest contradiction, in the Lebanese state—a republic born
through and renewed by latter-day Règlement Organiques known as the
National Pacts of 1943 and 1989.3
If nothing else, I have tried to suggest that sectarianism occurred not in
the distant past but in an era of the in-between, when old-regime society
had collapsed but an independent nationalist society had not yet formed—
166


[PDF page 185]
Epilogue / 167
a period of indigenous, European, and Ottoman interaction and collabora-
tion that spawned the contested culture of sectarianism. On the one hand,
it was a culture of the elites, who fought to keep their privileges intact and
to maintain a hierarchical social order; on the other hand, sectarianism also
reflected popular visions of the future, of liberation in a new landscape—
visions which pushed the ahali to violate social boundaries and to demand
rights that they thought were guaranteed to them by the Tanzimat. Yet
what has been deemed by historians to be the great success of a monolithic
sectarianism, the war of 1860, was in fact the great failure of a single sec-
tarian identity to impose itself in a world in transition.
explaining 1860
To a certain extent, nationalist concern with sectarianism as an allegedly
primordial religious identity that threatened (and still threatens) the na-
tion reflects its own nineteenth-century heritage. A colonial discourse of
progress and reform generated its atavistic antithesis, an immutable and
ahistorical religious fanaticism. Despite their many differences, contempo-
rary European writers wrote about sectarian violence with detachment,
quite literally gazing down at what they took to be a premodern spectacle,
just as Ottoman officials banished the events of 1860 to the realm of the ir-
rational. The creation of the Mutasarrifiyya was from the outset an impe-
rial process, decided first in Istanbul by the Sultan’s servants in conjunc-
tion with the European commissioners and then forced on the local elites
and the general population. This fait accompli renewed a pattern of mod-
ernized elitist sectarian politics within a single administrative framework.
Accompanying the imperial diplomacy and rival colonial interventions
that brought about the Mutasarrifiyya was a plethora of European ac-
counts explaining the nature of the violence. Jesuits, Protestants, French
officials, and British writers tried their hand at revealing the “truth” of
1860 from their allegedly detached and theoretically objective standpoints.
They lamented their own blindness at ignoring, while their rivals encour-
aged, the supposedly age-old religious passions of the mountaineers,
which had resulted (in their own eyes at least) in the inevitable calamity of
1860.4 With few exceptions, they wrote as if France and Britain had played
no part in the tumultuous history of the mid-nineteenth-century Levant.
They spoke as if the disastrous partition of Mount Lebanon had not been a
European diktat imposed by the combined wisdom of colonial powers, and
they assumed that the violence of 1860 belonged to a premodern world.
I will not dwell here on such accounts as Charles Churchill’s The Druzes


[PDF page 186]
168 / Epilogue
and the Maronites under the Turkish Rule and Baptistin Poujoulat’s La
Vérité sur la Syrie, both of which served as polemics against the so-called
barbaric Turkish rule. Beyond their invocation of native tribalism, these
European histories were written in a manner which effectively denied any
agency to the local actors. They believed in a grand Muslim plot, in which
Hurs¸id was a key figure. Ascribed with a mischievous, cunning, secretive,
and above all “rampant fanaticism” against Christendom and modernity,
Hurs¸id was blamed for setting Druze against Maronite. Churchill could
not hold back his anger at Europe for trusting the villainous “Turk.” He
wrote that far from being an accident, 1860 was the product of a “spirit of
calculating and deliberate malice and hatred, spreading its meshes through
a long series of years, to circumvent and then trample upon its unfortunate
victims.”5
Such European histories, which have been lauded by Arab newspapers
and consistently and (often) uncritically used as major sources by those
writing the history of the region, have been at the forefront of obfuscating
the complex realities of 1860.6 They have been singularly unhelpful in ex-
plaining sectarian identity as anything but an essential, unchanging, pre-
modern condition—the genuine sympathy and concern most of these
writers felt for the Christians of Mount Lebanon notwithstanding. Much
the same could be said about French descriptions that anticipated or justi-
fied the imposition of French mandatory rule in Lebanon following the
collapse of the Ottoman Empire. Jesuit authors such as Henri Lammens
wrote his La Syrie: Précis historique with an eye fixedly set on 1860 as the
great example of the backward-looking Ottoman Empire’s failure to realize
the difference between Christian Lebanon and its Muslim environment
and, of course, its failure to negotiate a transition to the modern world;
with another eye, however, Lammens determinedly looked forward to the
great task that lay before France to overcome this historical legacy with her
rational, Christian, and modern administration.7
Ottoman historians such as Cevdet Pasha—to say nothing of other
court chroniclers such as Lütfi Efendi and later republican historians such
as Res¸at Kaynar, M. Tayyib Gökbilgin, and A. Haluk Ülman—glossed over
the problematic nature of Ottoman rule in the periphery of the Empire.
Needless to say, Ottoman historians justified Fuad Pasha’s brutal restora-
tion of order in Syria. In fact, Ottoman and republican historians, with the
possible exception of Cevdet Pasha, exhibited an astounding ignorance of
the province (far more egregious than Churchill’s) and an unshakable be-
lief in the kadim ül-cereyan (long-running) religious hostility between
Druzes and Maronites. Like the Europeans, whom they always accused of


[PDF page 187]
Epilogue / 169
being behind the war of 1860, the Ottoman and Turkish historians perpet-
uated rather than contradicted colonial knowledge, albeit from an imperial
trajectory concerned with protecting and promoting the Ottoman state.8
In the Ottoman and Turkish historiography, the indigenous people were
reduced to instruments of someone else’s history, with no conscious aware-
ness of the stakes involved during the course of events. To these historians,
the struggle for modernity was a contest between the reforming Ottomans
on the one hand and intriguing Europeans and reactionary elements
within the Sublime State on the other. Mount Lebanon was merely a
venue for this struggle, and its inhabitants merely its pawns and victims.
wars with history
Despite the deluge of European accounts of the war of 1860 and the trickle
of Ottoman and later Turkish descriptions of the same event, local, Arabic-
speaking nineteenth-century chroniclers managed to present their own
understandings of the sectarian violence. The first and most striking dif-
ference between local narratives and those of the Europeans and Ottomans
is one of perspective: whereas the European and Ottoman observers com-
mented from the luxury of distance and from the vantage point of moderns
looking down with unconcealed horror at the savagery below, indigenous
writers were overwhelmed by the urgency of proximity. To them, the war
of 1860 was not simply a tribal problem that haunted the periphery of im-
perial or colonial concern, as it appeared to European and Ottoman offi-
cials, but rather a calamity that devastated local society, uprooted thou-
sands, and left a legacy of mutual acrimony and fear both within and,
especially, between communities. As was the case in the era before the age
of reform, the local chroniclers were drawn primarily from mostly Chris-
tian elite circles, but unlike their prereform counterparts they were con-
sumed by the need to provide some explanation for and a sense of closure
to the recent events.
To these authors, one form of history ended in 1860. The violence they
had witnessed had broken with the normal cycle and rhythm of local soci-
ety, for it was not that of elite feuds, which had been the staple of old-
regime chronicles. Instead it involved entire communities in which all
rules and customs were violated; social order as it had been known simply
dissolved into the fluidity and possibility of sectarian violence, the ulti-
mate goal of which, wrote one priest following the war’s end, “only [God]
knows.”9 The violence, in short, brought the local communities to the
brink of extermination both physically and metaphorically in an era of


[PDF page 188]
170 / Epilogue
massive transformation—an era in which European and Ottoman power
were more intrusive than ever before. The violence of 1860 was viewed as
a divinely sanctioned aberration of the normal.10
The first order of the day, therefore, was to reconstruct a sense of sta-
bility, to make the recent past make sense by drawing on one of the princi-
pal tenants of presectarian knowledge, namely the distance that separated
the juhhal from those who knew better, those who were in a position to
understand the consequences, and those who were empowered by tradition
to speak for society. Bishops and priests, educated men such as Mikhayil
Mishaqa, and notables such as Yusuf Karam interpreted the events of 1860
not as a social struggle but as a “plot” against Christians that fed on the ig-
norance of both Druze and Maronite ahali.11 Those who recorded the
“truth” of 1860 were surrounded by archives from the Kisrawan rebellion,
with letters signed and sealed by Tanyus Shahin infused with a language
of rights and equality. Yet all the elitist histories were recorded in the dis-
empowering, passive, and flowery language of plots, as if events were be-
yond the people’s control. These historians discerned a higher purpose that
no ordinary, ignorant person could possibly comprehend. If nothing else,
the existence of such indigenous literature, written before the develop-
ment of a formal nationalist discourse, brings into question the often sim-
plistic transitive relationship between colonialist and nationalist knowl-
edge.
Here then were manuscripts, books, and letters penned by the local
elites, which were produced alongside colonial discourse; in some cases, it
is true, they were inspired by colonialist knowledge. For example,
Churchill’s vivid descriptions of the massacres sometimes filtered back into
local accounts with suspicious similarity.12 On the whole, the local histo-
ries were an autonomous voice that persisted alongside colonial language
and did not simply replicate it.13
The first local narratives were produced immediately following 1860,
and they aimed to influence the decision-making process that led to the
creation of the Mutasarrifiyya. They attempted to exonerate a particular
community and to make sectarian claims on Europe as well as on the Ot-
toman Empire. Maronite bishops lost no time in putting forward their own
fantasy of possible development: that the Maronites alone be allowed to
govern Mount Lebanon since “history” proved that they had always been
the rulers and that only with them at the helm could Mount Lebanon (to
which Beirut, the Bekaa, Tripoli, Sayda, and Tyre would have to be added
to make it viable) prosper and be made more amenable to the cause of “civ-
ilization.”14 For their part, the Druze notables presented the British am-


[PDF page 189]
Epilogue / 171
bassador in Istanbul with a lengthy rebuttal to Christian claims that the
Druzes were the instigators of the conflict. “As it appeared, and is known
[throughout] all the land and filled all ears, . . . the Maronite Nation have
premeditated since 1840, about 20 years ago, the total extirpation of the
Druses from their Mountains.”15 Central to their contention were their re-
peated allegations about the existence of a Maronite “plot” to destroy
them. The Maronite bishops, in turn, proposed a similar story with the
roles reversed. In their version, it was the Druzes, indeed the Muslims
generally, who sought to destroy Christianity in the Levant. The Patriarch
was warned by his representative in Rome that the origins of events were
not to be found “in your neighbors but from those who are higher than
them.”16
Belief in conspiracy, no matter how understandable under the circum-
stances, lessened the need to face the contradictions that lay at the heart of
changing communal identities. Maronite and Druze notables could and did
(and still do) sling accusations at each other, but beneath those accusations
was (and remains) an acceptance of the other side’s claims to represent its
own ta’ifa. The need to present themselves as a coherent, unified, and or-
dered community that “traditionally” had and still deserved to rule Mount
Lebanon alone necessitated the existence of their rival sect as an ordered
and unified body whose mischievous, nay abominable, actions had invali-
dated their particular claims to rule Mount Lebanon.17 It is ironic indeed
that just as the people of Mount Lebanon were involved in the making of
their history, their historians were actively contributing to writing them
out of history.
After the catastrophe of 1860, local historians retreated to ponder the
meaning of the violence and to restore a vision of a unified community.
Their task was, in many ways, to go against the reality of the Mutasarri-
fiyya, which determinedly pretended that 1860 was a thing of the past, a
forgotten event, struck from official memory following Fuad Pasha’s mis-
sion.18 Yet in popular memory (which I have not touched on here) as well
as in the monasteries and in private family archives, a few manuscripts
survive to attest to the current of fear that persisted in Mount Lebanon.
The fact that the local authors broached the subject of 1860 was in itself a
subversive act because they threatened to evoke a history which was at
odds with an official memory that claimed to have uprooted all traces of the
events. Yet if these histories, which are today still scattered and frag-
mented, were to be placed side by side, they would narrate a simple story
of 1860 not as a fluid set of events in which the meaning of community was
contested at several levels but as a dramatic struggle— overseen, even in-


[PDF page 190]
172 / Epilogue
stigated, by unknown conspirators—between two communities for control
of Mount Lebanon.
Christian writers in particular were torn between the need to recount
and to remember the violence of the other sect, the need to maintain vigi-
lance against any future treachery, and the desire to get on with the busi-
ness of the day, administering Mount Lebanon on the basis of intercom-
munal cooperation under Ottoman auspices.19 Although accounts that
fueled the memories of intercommunal slaughter left little room for com-
promise, they framed the events within the context of divine wrath: a cat-
aclysm, a plot, but above all else an unusual event that implicitly suggested
that the usual history was that of intercommunal coexistence.20 In the ex-
isting literature, therefore, the Druzes were caught between their role as
compatriots of the Christians in Mount Lebanon and their recent history
as instruments of Christian agony. They were portrayed in two overlap-
ping, yet contradictory, manners—at once the perpetrators of a terrible
slaughter of Christians and the unsuspecting tools of the monstrous Turk-
ish plot of which they, too, were victims.
This contradiction is evident even in the most tendentious of manu-
scripts, such as Bishop Bustani’s recollections of 1860, which are preserved
today in Rome. In them, the Druzes were no longer willing instruments of
Turkish perfidy but rather unwitting accomplices. Bustani alleges that
Hurs¸id “seduced” the Druzes, that Kisrawan was a “trivial” matter that
was fanned into “sedition” by the enemies of the Christians while the
French consul stood aside. Yusuf Karam’s failure to aid the Christians—an
embarrassment that has not diminished Karam’s mythologized status as a
national hero of sorts—was put down to the combined pressure of the al-
legedly corrupt consul and the plotting Hurs¸id.21 In his own memoirs,
Karam recounts the same story of Turkish duplicity; he asserts that the
Druzes were led into civil strife.22 As if to confirm that 1860 was a tragedy
arising from a lack of foresight on the part of Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants,
the chronicler Iskandar Abkarius apocryphally relates how during one of
the battles between Druzes and Christians two men grappled and wrestled
on a beach just before dawn. In the heat of battle, they both fell into the
water and continued their struggle. A huge wave fell on them, and in the
ensuing confusion they were swept off to the deep, where they both
drowned. The moral of the story is not left to the reader’s imagination: in
the morning, their bodies were found on the beach, lifeless but still locked
in deadly embrace.23


[PDF page 191]
Epilogue / 173
the allegory of 1860
The meaning of the events of 1860 altered after the decolonization of the
Arab world, when nationalist discourse emerged as the dominant political
and cultural expression of the region. Nationalist historiography in all its
shades has inherited both the distant European and Ottoman perspectives
of sectarian violence and the immediacy and tragedy evident in local de-
scriptions. Determined to justify the existence of Lebanon as an independ-
ent state and with a vision of Lebanon “in” history, as the title of Philip
Hitti’s book put it, early nationalist scholars, like their peers in South Asia
and Africa, were unable to contemplate nationalism as anything but the
natural evolution of a people long under the domination of others. These
early scholars—from George Antonious to Philip Hitti to Asad Rustum to
Kamal Salibi— were convinced that modernity came only in the image of
a secular West, that 1860 was most clearly scripted as the dark point in the
nationalist narrative before an “Arab” or “Lebanese” awakening.24 Despite
the abundance of documentation available to them, few scholars compre-
hended the violence as anything more than a byproduct of elitist rivalries
in which, at set points, the dutiful ahali were marshaled in and out of the
nation’s history, maiming and plundering as they went.
I do not want to suggest that nationalist historians such as Hitti merely
replicated what came before them, because they did not. They exhibited a
fundamental belief in the naturalness of nationhood and in the inevitabil-
ity of the end of Ottoman rule. But when Lebanese and Arab nationalism
entered a period of sustained crisis in the 1970s, first with the failure to lib-
erate Palestine and then with the collapse of the Lebanese state, they and
their readers were suddenly left, in Albert Hourani’s words, with the feel-
ing “that something had been left out.”25 The outbreak of civil war in 1975
came as a rude shock given the optimism and confidence of the earlier na-
tionalist histories. Salibi, for example, undertook a revisionist history of
Lebanon by criticizing various nationalist and sectarian mythologies in his
A House of Many Mansions: The History of Lebanon Reconsidered, in
which he urged the Lebanese and Arabs to unthink many misconceptions
and to “start from a clean slate.”26 Adding to the disenchantment with na-
tionalist discourse, many authors watching the Lebanese predicament un-
fold singled out sectarianism and religious fanaticism as “premodern” ves-
tiges that have precluded the development of a modern, democratic, and
liberal state in the Middle East.27 Others, such as Georges Corm, however,
understood the civil war as the revenge of an Ottoman past and the conse-
quence of geopolitical rivalries over which the Lebanese people had no con-


[PDF page 192]
174 / Epilogue
trol.28 Perhaps most symptomatic of this reappraisal, which aims at draw-
ing a national lesson, is Leila Fawaz’s An Occasion for War, which con-
cludes with a comparison of the two civil wars. The recent Lebanese con-
flict also gave rise to a flood of partisan histories, to resurrected
“memories” of 1860 that warned of the allegedly treacherous nature of the
“Druze,” the “Maronite,” or the “Muslim.” And, in the aftermath of con-
flict, the Lebanese government has turned its back on the past, just as the
Ottomans did. Curiously, however, it has paradoxically abolished and
criminalized the memory of conflict, at once taking refuge in the myths of
historical tolerance and coexistence while signifying its own profound
skepticism of these myths.29
The story of 1860 should not be understood simply as a national allegory
but on its own terms and in its own nineteenth-century context. In the pre-
ceding pages, I have sought to explain a contemporary problem that can
neither be banished to some distant past nor be seen as a mere consequence
of colonialism, imperialism, or capitalism. Among the greatest red her-
rings of the history of the Middle East has been the characterization of sec-
tarianism as an obstacle to modernity and as a symptom of a so-called arc
of crisis. This interpretation has led to an increasingly frustrated path of
historical inquiry, with some scholars earnestly searching backward in
time for answers while the problem of sectarianism marches forward,
growing ever more entrenched and ever more complex. The beginning of
sectarianism did not imply a reversion. It marked a rupture, a birth of a
new culture that singled out religious affiliation as the defining public and
political characteristic of a modern subject and citizen. To overcome it, if it
is at all possible, requires yet another rupture, a break as radical for the
body politic as the advent of sectarianism was for the old regime. It re-
quires another vision of modernity.
Finally, by suggesting that the ethnic and religious conflicts in such ev-
idence today are not revivals of primordial passions, we will begin to ap-
preciate that the processes at work in nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon
are also at work in other modern societies, albeit in different forms and
with different discourses. Therefore, the question that I ask is not why the
Middle East has failed to modernize or secularize—which assumes that the
Western model of separation of church and state is the only path toward
modernity—but how religion became the site of a multifaceted colonial
encounter and why religious violence became a crucial component of na-
tional expression. What happened in Mount Lebanon could occur, and in
fact has occurred, elsewhere in the modern world.
