[PDF page 19]
1 Religion as the Site of the
Colonial Encounter
Sitt Naaify came down and entered the serail about an hour after
sunset. It was dark. She called for a lamp. It was brought her.
Ordering it to be held up before her, she for a long time feasted
her eyes on the ghastly sight. Several hundred mangled corpses lay
heaped up over each other before her. “Well done my good and
faithful Druzes,” she exclaimed; “this is just what I expected from
you.” The women and some of the Shehab emirs who had hidden
in their own harem, now thronged around her. The latter kissed
her feet and implored her for pardon and forgiveness. She told
them all to follow her. The Turks were all this time seen flitting
about like spectres through the court, under the cover of darkness,
turning over the dead bodies, if perchance they might grope up
some plunder; and wherever life yet lingered, giving the coup de
grâce.
Charles H. Churchill, The Druzes and the Maronites
under the Turkish Rule from 1840 to 1860 (1862)
I
n the hills of Mount Lebanon, a few miles from the scene of this mas-
sacre, a Christian man, Salim Shawish, wondered if a similar fate awaited
him and his family. For in his own home sat a Druze notable who, sword
and musket within easy reach, announced that he had come to “save some
persons and kill others.” It was nearing the end of the Islamic calendar year
1276, the early summer of 1860 by Christian reckoning. The setting was
the prosperous but ill-fated town of Dayr al-Qamar—the “city of the
mountain” in local parlance—which lay at the heart of a murderous strug-
gle between the Druzes and Maronites of Mount Lebanon. The war pitted
neighbor against neighbor, forcing a sense of communal segregation on a
society that had hitherto thrived on everyday contact and mixture. With
this multicommunal heritage in mind and with the knowledge of how
things were ordinarily meant to be, Salim begged the Druze lord, whose
family, the Abu Nakads, had once made (and were now reasserting) undis-
puted claim to the town under siege, to protect him; he brought the notable
coffee, prepared him a meal, and smoked with him, and then offered him
1


[PDF page 20]
2 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
silver inkstands, watches, jewels, and whatever else of value he had, in an
effort to keep him in his home. The symbols of prestige and social order in
Mount Lebanon, hospitality and the serving of coffee, continued in the
house of a wealthy Christian, while outside, Druzes battled Christians and
turned their world upside down.1
When the war ended toward the end of June, some two hundred of an
estimated seven hundred villages were left pillaged, churches and con-
vents had been razed, and Druze religious sanctuaries were desecrated.
The Druzes had carried the day, cleansing whole towns of their Christian
inhabitants. When Muslims in Damascus rioted soon after to protest in-
creasing European influence in their city, thousands more Christians were
slaughtered in the ugliest urban violence of nineteenth-century Syria.
The Sultan of the Ottoman Empire was made to hear what one chronicler
described as the “sighs of Syria.”2 For unlike natural contagions, unlike
the plagues and the locusts, unlike the feuds of old and the palace coups
that somehow always fit into the order of things, the events of 1860 en-
tered bloodstained into the history of the Ottoman East, altering it for-
ever.
In the pages that follow, I reconstruct the history of modern sectarian
identity in Ottoman Mount Lebanon, which provided the stage on which
the cataclysmic violence in 1860 was enacted. The story begins many years
earlier, when local Lebanese society was opened, and indeed opened itself,
to Ottoman and European discourses of reform that made religion the site
of a colonial encounter between a self-styled “Christian” West and what it
saw as its perennial adversary, an “Islamic” Ottoman Empire. This en-
counter profoundly altered the meaning of religion in the multiconfes-
sional society of Mount Lebanon because it emphasized sectarian identity
as the only viable marker of political reform and the only authentic basis
for political claims. The story is of the symbiosis between indigenous tra-
ditions and practices—in which religion was enmeshed in complex social
and political relations—and Ottoman modernization, which became para-
mount in reshaping the political self-definition of each community along
religious lines. From the outset, therefore, it is imperative to dispel any il-
lusion that sectarianism is simply or exclusively a native malignancy or a
foreign conspiracy. Sectarianism can be narrated only by continually ac-
knowledging and referring to both indigenous and imperial histories,
which interacted— both collided and collaborated—to produce a new his-
torical imagination.
Sectarianism is a modern story, and, for those intimately involved in its
unfolding, it is the modern story—a story that has and that continues to


[PDF page 21]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 3
define and dominate their lives. Although this book records a history that
transpires in rural Mount Lebanon, it has many parallels in Ayodhya,
Kosovo, and Belfast. It is all about location in a modern world, where the
margins can become centers. The violence of 1860, as I hope will become
clear, took place not only between Maronite and Druze communities but
also within these communities in an attempt to define their own respective
boundaries in an era of upheaval. I am most interested in this story within
the story: namely the struggle over communal representation that was re-
flected in episodes of intracommunal social violence that constituted a fun-
damental part of broader religious violence across sectarian communities.
In short, I illustrate the contests over the meaning of religion as it entered
the political sphere between 1840 and 1860. I elaborate on the contradic-
tions in, and the failure of, the attempt to create uncomplicated and pure
sectarian identities that were at once private and public, communal and na-
tional, elite and subaltern, modern and traditional.
This task, however, is not easily undertaken precisely because the war-
fare of 1860 and, of course, the destruction of Lebanon in our own times
have given scholars and laypersons alike the distinct impression that the
Lebanese problem is fundamentally tribal, that sectarianism is a disease
that prevents modernization, that Lebanon is, in the final analysis, a
metaphor for a failed nationalism in the non-Western world. What has
been studied (with good reason) has been the geopolitics of conflict, which
has always assumed inert, unchanging sectarian identities. In the after-
math of the strife of 1860, for example, as news of the events trickled into
Istanbul and from there was forwarded to the European capitals, there
emerged a general revulsion at the wholesale massacre of Christian inhab-
itants of the Empire. To a large degree, the reaction of Ottoman statesmen
stemmed from the fact that the two decades before the massacres of 1860
had been a period of Ottoman modernization. Aware of the Ottoman Em-
pire’s image as the “sick man of Europe,” the Sultan and his ministers had
decreed in 1839 that all subjects were equal before the law regardless of
their religion. This move and other reforms in the administration known
collectively as the Tanzimat were calculated to satisfy European demands
for the protection of the Christian communities and to inculcate a notion
of a national and secular subjecthood. The local Christian subjects, in other
words, had become yardsticks of the modernization of the Ottoman Em-
pire: their slaughter dealt the imperial reform process a cruel blow. An ex-
asperated Fuad Pasha, the Ottoman minister for foreign affairs sent to in-
vestigate the massacres, insisted that the conflict in Mount Lebanon was an
“age-old” struggle between tribal communities whose “ignorance” had


[PDF page 22]
Map 1. Syria. (From The Illustrated Atlas, and Modern History of the World,
Geographical, Political, Commercial, and Statistical: Index Gazetteer of the World.
London: John Tallis and Co., 1851)


[PDF page 23]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 5
interrupted the reform movement.3 For their part, Europeans who took
any interest in the affairs of the Ottomans fused the Damascus outbreak in
July and the Lebanese massacres which preceded it in June into a single in-
dication of the primordial passions of the local inhabitants. Karl Marx
mused that the Lebanon events were little more than “atrocious outrages
of wild tribes,” while a French Jesuit publication declared that the events of
1860 were clearly propelled by the Druze “hatred of the Catholic religion
and the fanaticism of the Muslims.”4 For both Europeans and Ottomans
locked in a struggle over the meaning and direction of the reform and
progress of the Ottoman Empire, the events in Syria were in and of them-
selves outside the realm of rationality and history. Rather, as Lord Duf-
ferin, the British aristocrat charged by his government to investigate the
massacres, put it, “Think of what a thousand years have done for England,
France, Germany and the rest of Europe. . . . Then turn to the changeless
East, and behold the contrast. Time there seems almost to be shorn of his
wings, and all things remain as they have ever been.”5
Since the nineteenth century, historians of many different persuasions
have scrutinized these events and have continued to link a rural conflict in
Mount Lebanon to the urban riot in Damascus. In varying degrees, and
with a difference in emphasis, the root causes of the violence have been de-
lineated by scholars consumed with one overriding question: why has the
Middle East failed to modernize, to develop, and most important, to secu-
larize? The foregone conclusion has been that the violence represents the
triumph of tradition, manifested as sectarianism, over the modern ideals of
coexistence and tolerance; and all efforts have gone toward explaining the
conditions under which this so-called tradition could reemerge with such
devastating consequences. Even the most nuanced of analyses assumes
that sectarian identities and mobilizations operate outside of history, that
local inhabitants are either tolerant or intolerant, that there are many so-
cial, economic, or political “root causes” which are historical, but that the
violence which devastated mid-nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon was
only a reaction to these modern historical events, an explosion, a calamity,
above all, an anarchical upsurge of ancient loyalties among unthinking
subjects.6
This scholarly presumption of a religious violence devoid of social and
cultural meaning is reflected (often urgently in countries on the brink of
destruction because of sectarian hostilities) in secular nationalist writing
that seeks to distance itself from moments of extreme religious expres-
sion.7 Turkish historiography, for example, has depicted the troubles in
Mount Lebanon strictly as a consequence of European political intrigue


[PDF page 24]
6 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
against an emerging Turkish (Ottoman) nation.8 For its part, Lebanese and
Arab historiography has blamed Ottoman policies of divide and rule for
the consequent religious divisions that continue to haunt the quest for
Lebanese and Arab unity.9 Both historiographies, in fact, view sectarian vi-
olence as an unwelcome blemish (even a stain) on the nation’s “past” and a
temporary setback on the road to national liberation and modernization.
Moreover, both historiographies consider intercommunal religious strife
to be the ultimate negation of the transhistorical virtues of tolerance, di-
versity, and coexistence, which are supposedly embodied in Turkish and
Arab nationalism. This nationalist approach to sectarianism, which poses a
tolerant and secular modernity against a resurgent religious fundamental-
ism, has itself to be historicized. I do not see the episodes of religious vio-
lence between 1840 and 1860 as symptomatic of the failure of a nation or
nationalism but as an expression of a new form of local politics and knowl-
edge that arose in a climate of transition and reform in the mid-nine-
teenth-century Ottoman Empire and that laid the foundations for a (later)
discourse of nationalist secularism.
While my work necessarily builds on the abundant scholarship on reli-
gious violence and depends on a historical narrative of Ottoman modern-
ization long charted by historians, my goal here is to shift the emphasis
away from narratives which transform victimized communities into Gi-
rardesque scapegoats, available targets of a Muslim backlash motivated pri-
marily by broad economic and political trends, toward a narrative which
returns contingency to a historical process that produced what I call a cul-
ture of sectarianism.
In other words, I understand sectarianism to mean two fundamentally
related things. First, it is a practice that developed out of, and must be un-
derstood in the context of, nineteenth-century Ottoman reform. Second, it
is a discourse that is scripted as the Other to various competing Ottoman,
European, and Lebanese narratives of modernization. Sectarianism
emerged as a practice when Maronite and Druze elites, Europeans and Ot-
tomans struggled to define an equitable relationship of the Druze and
Maronite “tribes” and “nations” to a modernizing Ottoman state. It
emerged when the old regime of Mount Lebanon, which was dominated by
an elite hierarchy in which secular rank rather than religious affiliation de-
fined politics, was discredited in the mid-nineteenth century. The collapse
of the old regime opened up the space for a new form of politics and repre-
sentation based on a language of religious equality. This transformation
privileged the religious community rather than elite status as the basis for


[PDF page 25]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 7
any project of modernization, citizenship, and civilization. Concomitantly,
sectarianism also developed as a discourse—as the set of assumptions and
writings that described this changing subjectivity within a narrative of Ot-
toman, European, and Lebanese modernization.10
Because sectarianism refers to the deployment of religious heritage as a
primary marker of modern political identity, it is important to distinguish
it from religious confrontations that occurred in the medieval and early
modern world (for instance, between Huguenots and Catholics in
France).11 Understood this way, in its modern context, sectarianism can no
longer be taken for granted as a self-evident phenomenon, as it has been
for too long. It cannot be caused by a single event or person, for it is ulti-
mately an act of interpretation that shapes as well as is shaped by religious
mobilizations and violence in the modern world. To appreciate the contin-
gency and complexity of sectarianism as it emerged as both a practice and
a discourse we must investigate the connections between, and the contra-
dictions in, sectarian actions and metaphors deployed by Maronites and
Druzes, elites and nonelites, Ottomans and Westerners.
Since the publication of Ranajit Guha’s seminal essay, “The Prose of
Counter-Insurgency,” and more recently Partha Chatterjee’s study of In-
dian nationalism, scholars have developed a powerful critique of national-
ist assumptions by demonstrating how elitist nationalist knowledge, in-
cluding the depictions of sectarian mobilizations, derive from colonial
logic.12 Yet despite all the focus on the subaltern as a vehicle to criticize the
elitism embedded in nationalist discourse, there has been a tendency to dis-
cuss colonialism and nationalism as fully formed projects that seem to au-
tomatically produce all sorts of resistance.13 Sectarianism as I see it is not
simply a “form of colonialist knowledge” (as Gyanendra Pandey has as-
serted in the context of the historiography of communalism in India) nor a
reality which can be traced to some precolonial past.14 It is, rather, an in-
termingling of both precolonial (before the age of Ottoman reform) and
postcolonial (during and after the age of reform) understandings,
metaphors, and realities that has to be dissected at at least two overlapping
and mutually reinforcing levels, of the elite and nonelite. In other words,
sectarianism is a modernist knowledge in the sense that it was produced in
the context of European hegemony and Ottoman reforms and because its
articulators at a colonial (European), imperial (Ottoman), and local
(Lebanese) level regarded themselves as moderns who used the historical
past to justify present claims and future development. Insofar as sectarian-
ism is indeed a colonialist knowledge, it is also and fundamentally both an


[PDF page 26]
8 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
imperial Ottoman knowledge and a local nationalist knowledge that are
not produced following or in reaction to colonialism but at the same time
as colonialist knowledge.
It follows that the colonial encounter being described here is less a rela-
tion of power mediated by various degrees of resistance than a location of
cultural interaction—a “contact zone”— consciously exploited by the na-
tives for their own material benefit.15 Rather than positing a dichotomy
between colonizer and colonized, where some of the colonized become la-
beled collaborators, it is more fruitful to study colonialism in the case of
the late Ottoman Empire as an arena of exchange, where collaboration is
not simply an act of individual betrayal of the “nation” to a colonial power
but a much more open-ended affair, the norm at a general level rather than
the exception at an individual one. France and Britain did not arrive (in this
case at least) in the Ottoman Empire unannounced, gunboats in harbor, to
“open” the Levant. Instead, Britain, France, and the Ottomans regulated
different aspects of the colonial encounter; this regulation presented the in-
digenous inhabitants of Mount Lebanon with avenues for reinterpreting
their own history, their own communal self-definition, and ultimately
their own rigid social order. Power, of course, was crucial because the en-
counter was never equal; the flow of transformative ideologies and prac-
tices headed mostly from Istanbul, Paris, and London to Mount Lebanon,
where the consequence of this exchange, sectarianism as both a knowledge
and a practice, was produced.
the context of reform
The imperial discourses of reform that encroached on Mount Lebanon
sprang from two distinct sources. Generally speaking, the first was Euro-
pean and the second Ottoman; their simultaneous arrival in Mount
Lebanon in the mid-nineteenth century heralded the beginnings of its sec-
tarian question. For the European statesmen who pored over maps of the
unreformed and unconquered Ottoman Empire, the idea of intervention in
the affairs of the Ottomans was integrally linked to the notions of philan-
thropy, despotism, and freedom that were most forcefully and eloquently
formulated in the nineteenth century.16 In an age when classical Oriental-
ism was giving way to Thomas Macaulay’s polemics on India, when Eu-
rope’s military, economic, and industrial developments were thought to
stem from a civilizational and cultural (as well as racial) superiority, it was
perhaps inevitable that the Ottoman Empire’s vast territories were con-
fronted with what John Stuart Mill characterized as the sacred duty of in-


[PDF page 27]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 9
tervention in “nations which are still barbarous” where it was “likely to be
for their own benefit that they should be conquered and held in subjection
by foreigners.”17
To Mill and to other European thinkers of his time, colonial rule offered
the most effective method of ensuring the spread of civilization. In their
minds, Christian European despotism was strategic and measured, an ex-
tension of European civilization, whereas Oriental despotism was under-
stood as fanatical and all-encompassing, not an extension but the essence
of Asian civilization. In the enactment of colonial rule in India, as in Egypt,
therefore, a “positive” European despotism was summoned to crush the
older and more entrenched “Asiatic” despotism. European intervention
was progressive in the sense that, as Marx phrased it, England forcibly
brought about the “regeneration” of India by destroying its prehistory—
that is, the history of endlessly recurring dynastic despotism.18 The lan-
guage of reform informed a whole spectrum of European involvement
with the non-European world as Europeans attempted to right what they
perceived to be wrong, immoral, and injurious to the natural flow of hu-
man history.19
In the Ottoman Empire, however, the debate over intervention and
nonintervention took a most interesting turn. Although the empire was
not formally colonized by European powers, colonial ideologies were very
much in place, legitimizing the use of overwhelming force (at Navarino in
1827, for instance) to force the Ottomans to comply with European pres-
sure.20 Not surprisingly, an ample stock of racial and cultural stereotypes
clearly demarcated the Ottoman as inferior, premodern, and corrupt, at
best a “wily barbarian.”21 But there was also a realization, following what
Metternich termed the “frightful catastrophe” at Navarino, that the Ot-
tomans could be pushed only so far, that their sovereignty could be com-
promised only so much before they were left too weak to defend them-
selves from foreign invasion.22 The problem that presented itself,
therefore, was how to bring “advancement” to the Empire without dis-
rupting the European balance of power.
For European statesmen and historians, the reformation of the Ot-
toman Empire stemmed almost entirely from Europe’s sense of civilizing
mission.23 “Europe is at hand,” declared Stratford Canning, one of the self-
proclaimed architects of Ottoman reforms, “with its science, its labour, and
its capital. The Koran, the harem, and a Babel of languages, are no doubt so
many obstacles to advancement in a Western sense.”24 Religion, as I have
already mentioned, became the site of the colonial encounter in the Ot-
toman Empire in that European officials defined the parameters of reform


[PDF page 28]
10 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
through a modernization discourse couched in terms of a religious civiliza-
tional clash. Both the problem (Islam) and the solution (European Chris-
tian rationality) were defined in monolithic religious terms. Furthermore,
diplomats like Canning imagined the Empire not so much as a multiethnic
and multireligious territory but as a Muslim state with large “minorities”
of Christians scattered in various cities and provinces. This understanding
of the Empire as a “mosaic” where ethnic and religious groups existed as
separate and autonomous cultural and physical units was embedded in
Canning’s description of the local Christians as the “subjugated classes.”25
To “free” the native Christians, the ambassadors and consuls of the Great
Powers spoke on their behalf, plucked them from the obscurity (and com-
plexity) of their everyday existence, and depicted them simply as the vic-
tims of unbending Muslim dominion. As a result, and in spite of the fact
that European consuls and missionaries bewailed the “degenerate” nature
of Oriental Christianity and its bigoted and uneducated priesthood, they
nevertheless considered the local Christian populations as barometers by
which to measure the success or failure of reform.26
Ottoman statesmen broached the problem of reform from an altogether
different trajectory. As they were elaborated in 1839 and 1856, the reforms
pursued by the Sublime Porte represented a fundamentally imperial proj-
ect of centralization and an effort to build an avowedly modern state. After
the eighteenth century, which had witnessed fragmentation of imperial
control, new laws were called for to improve security, end corruption, ra-
tionalize taxation, and regularize army service. Following the rise of
Mehmed Ali, in fact in direct response to the threat posed to the empire by
its rebellious vassal in the 1830s, Sultan Abdülmecid proclaimed the Gül-
hane edict in 1839.27 The basic aim of the Gülhane decree and others which
followed, known collectively as the Tanzimat, was to reform the adminis-
tration and reorganize the Empire in an effort to maintain its territorial in-
tegrity. It stipulated an equitable taxation of subjects according to their
means and pledged to ensure their security and property. It also specifi-
cally declared the juridical equality of all subjects—hence the equality of
Muslims with Christians— but framed this bold declaration within a dis-
course of a revitalization of Islamic tradition. The underlying assumption
of the Tanzimat was that reforms could be enacted without any mediation
from the outside world, that the Sultan’s will was absolute, and that all his
subjects did not participate in any decision making but partook of his im-
perial benevolence. The Gülhane decree of 1839 reinforced the notion of
the Sultan as a fair arbitrator for all his subjects. From an Ottoman stand-
point the Gülhane proclamation did not herald a negation of the past as


[PDF page 29]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 11
much as it sought to set a new direction by advocating a secular Ottoman
subjecthood within a modernized yet extremely hierarchical Islamic state.
The Tanzimat looked both forward and backward and encompassed both
old and new. Thus, even as European statesmen insisted that the Tanzimat
ushered in a new era of rational government that necessarily abandoned an
allegedly archaic, immoral, and stagnant Oriental culture, the Ottomans
understood the Tanzimat as a vehicle to enter the modern world with a
conserved and modernized tradition.28
Although reforming Ottoman statesmen tried to redefine their empire
as an Islamic state within an orbit of friendly foreign powers (düvel-i
fahime ve mülakat-ı dostane), they were still confronted with the problem
of elaborating a notion of modern Ottoman sovereignty in an age of Euro-
pean hegemony. At no point in its history was the Empire more vulnera-
ble than at this critical moment of transition, when Mehmed Ali’s armies
threatened the Empire with dismemberment and the Russian armies had
marched to the outskirts of Istanbul. And at no point had the European
powers ever assembled as much data or as many facts and anecdotes re-
garding the perceived oppression of the native Christians. The upshot was
that just as the Ottomans were moving away from a vaguely defined mil-
let system, in which the Sunni Muslims were treated as socially and cul-
turally superior to the other communities of the Empire, and were moving
toward a more integrative form of government, the Europeans favored and
intervened on behalf of the Christians.29
Such contradictions were most apparent in regions like Mount Lebanon,
which was home to a large Christian population. Long neglected by Ot-
toman officials as a backwater of the imperial domains, Mount Lebanon’s
biblical landscape appealed to foreign missionaries while its similarity to
the Highlands moved British (especially Scottish) travelers, and its al-
legedly counterrevolutionary spirituality attracted those refugees fleeing
from the secularization of France.30 Perceived by European powers as a
mountain refuge in which they had a historical, religious, and increasingly
strategic stake, nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon became the location
for a host of competing armies and ideologies and for totally contradictory
interpretations of the meaning of reform. This context of flux created the
conditions for sectarianism to arise not as a coherent force but as a reflec-
tion of fractured identities, pulled hither and thither by the enticements
and coercions of Ottoman and European power. Mount Lebanon at mid-
century was a peripheral region drawn toward multiple metropoles. The
European powers promoted their Christianity as a method of access to the
indigenous people, while the Ottoman state relied on the tenuous bonds of


[PDF page 30]
12 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
loyalty (or such that theoretically existed) of a marginal population that
inhabited the fringes of the imperial imagination. In recognition of their
sudden elevation to a matter of international concern, the people of Mount
Lebanon actively participated in the struggle over modernity. They were as
transformed as their surroundings. They took advantage of the presence of
the various imperial powers by declaring themselves to be both European
protégés and loyal Ottoman subjects. But they were themselves con-
fronted by a latent contradiction in the Gülhane decree that became more
apparent as it was translated across the social spectrum and as it traveled
from center to periphery: the contradiction between a notion of equality
before the law regardless of rank and station that was guaranteed by the
state and a rigid adherence to a hierarchical and inviolable social order,
without which there could be no state. Because the Tanzimat was gener-
ated in the nebulous space between an imperial will and the colonial inter-
ventions of several European powers, there were several understandings,
translations, and fragmentations of imperial discourses of reform as they
traveled from center to periphery and back again.31 The story of sectarian-
ism that I have chosen to tell, therefore, is one of divergent local under-
standings of the imperial reform process that both reaffirmed local order
and subverted it in the years leading up to, and including, 1860.
sources and structure of argument
Like most historians of the nineteenth century, I am faced with a prolific
colonial archive which has quite literally dominated the writing of Middle
Eastern history. The plethora of missionary accounts, consular reports,
travelogues, accounts of scientific expeditions, and personal memoirs con-
stitute an undeniably rich historical record. The question of how to read
such sources productively (a task made immeasurably easier following the
publication of Edward Said’s Orientalism) in order to script a story of sec-
tarianism that their authors would never have countenanced is certainly
one goal of this book. But to read Charles Churchill’s The Druze and Mar-
onites under the Turkish Rule against the grain—to contextualize (and at
the same time dispute) the power of his claim “to fathom the pervading
mind, as it were, of the two great sects” of Mount Lebanon—recourse
must be made to the available indigenous archive.32 Unlike many histori-
ans who study what Hugh Trevor-Roper once mocked as “the unreward-
ing gyrations of barbarous tribes in picturesque but irrelevant corners of
the globe,” I am fortunate to have before me a wealth of largely untapped
Ottoman and Lebanese materials.33 I say untapped because although most


[PDF page 31]
Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter / 13
of these sources are known to historians and many of them have been used
to great effect, they have been utilized in one of two restricted fashions. Ei-
ther they are read to produce a “native” account to be examined alongside
Churchill’s, or they are deployed to counter Churchill’s narrative with the
aim of replacing it with a more authentic (and often nationalist) rendition
of events. Neither of these approaches is satisfactory, for they do not ex-
ploit the richness embedded within Churchill’s narrative, nor do they even
begin to explore the complexity of the local sources. To do both, to read
colonial history juxtaposed with its imperial Ottoman and local Lebanese
counterparts and to make them together divulge the layers, the contin-
gency, and the contradictions of the modernity of sectarianism is to do
them at the same time. Therefore, this book constantly weaves back and
forth between a variety of sources, constructing a narrative out of the in-
terplay of their differences.
The next two chapters contrast European perceptions of Mount
Lebanon as a mountainous refuge indomitably holding out against an Is-
lamic despotism (Chapter 2) with local understandings of Mount Lebanon’s
rural world, in which a hierarchy of notables dominated a social order at
the periphery of the Ottoman Empire (Chapter 3). Chapter 4 illustrates
how conflicting notions of reform, in an era of Eastern Question politics,
undermined the traditional order. Then I investigate how Mount Lebanon
was reinvented in sectarian terms by rival elites after the Europeans and
Ottomans decided to partition it along religious lines in 1842 (Chapter 5),
only to suggest an alternative reading of the emerging sectarian landscape
(Chapter 6); this chapter examines the role and proclamations of Tanyus
Shahin, the leader of a Maronite peasant uprising in 1859, to demonstrate
the limits and possibilities of popular interpretations of Ottoman reform.
The point is to interpret the sectarian violence in 1860 not as a tribal erup-
tion (as Ottoman and European observers would have it) but as an integral
part of the redefinition of new communal and social boundaries (Chapter
7). Chapter 8 analyzes the state-sponsored violence unleashed by Ottoman
officials following 1860 with the full support of the European powers as a
final (and successful) attempt to reestablish social order and to suppress
the popular interpretations of reform, thereby leaving the local elites (and
their Ottoman and European guardians) as the only “legitimate” players in
formal politics. In the Epilogue, I discuss the relationship between sectari-
anism and nationalism, underscoring my contention that sectarianism as
an idea draws meaning only within a nationalist paradigm and hence that
it belongs to our modern world.
Although I use a rough chronological narrative that makes obligatory


[PDF page 32]
14 / Religion as Site of Colonial Encounter
stops at the major turning points of the era, including the Egyptian inva-
sion of Syria in 1831, the uprising against the Egyptians in 1839 and the
Ottoman restoration of 1840, the partition of Mount Lebanon in 1842, the
Kisrawan rebellion of 1858 –1859, and the war of 1860, the point here is
not to retell what is already a well-known narrative of local history. I do
not delve into many episodes of violence (for example, those of 1845), just
as I do not fully explore many angles (such as the economic). Instead, I
have deliberately chosen to focus on one theme of a complex history, the
construction of sectarianism as an idea and its beginnings as a practice in
Mount Lebanon. For this reason, the argument developed here deliberately
eschews any comparison between the violence in 1860 Mount Lebanon
with other intercommunal hostilities, such as those of Aleppo in 1850 or
even those of Damascus in 1860, primarily because the cases of Aleppo and
Damascus had little relevance to the events in Mount Lebanon, which as an
autonomous rural region enjoyed its own specificities and its own cultural
and historical trajectory.34 My cutoff date of 1860 is not at all meant to in-
dicate a closure to the question of sectarian identity. Instead, I consider it
the end of the foundational period of a sectarian culture that continued
through the late Ottoman period and into the nationalist era.
My emphasis on Druzes and Maronites, as opposed to Orthodox Chris-
tians or Shi‘a, is done with some trepidation, although it is justified by the
fact that they were the two principal communities of Mount Lebanon in-
volved in sectarian violence. Whenever possible, I have tried to utilize doc-
uments from the period itself. The extremely rich archives of the Maronite
patriarchate proved invaluable, and recourse to the Bas¸bakanlık (Ottoman)
archives, where thousands of Ottoman and Arabic documents on Mount
Lebanon are preserved, as well as to the British and French consular corre-
spondence and a variety of missionary sources helped illuminate the layers
of sectarian identity with which I am centrally concerned.
My greatest disappointment, however, is that I have not been able to
write about the sectarian aspirations of the Druze community. This left-
out account, I must also acknowledge from the beginning, is the crucial as-
pect of the history that must one day be unearthed before the tale of sec-
tarianism can be told in its fullest sense. A relatively poor Druze
historiography has forced me to rely on the Abu Shaqra chronicle Al-
Harakat fi Lubnan ila ‘ahd al-Mutasarrifiyya, which was narrated, tran-
scribed, and edited several decades after 1860.35 I have had to choose be-
tween telling an incomplete history and not telling it at all. I have chosen
to tell what I can.
