[PDF page 33]
2 The Gentle Crusade
The sailors, smiling, point out to me Mount Lebanon; . . . I looked
up to the skies, and beheld the white and gilded crest of the Sannin
floating in the firmament over out heads. The fog prevented my
observing its base and sides. Its head alone appeared, bright and
serene in the blue sky. It occasioned one of the most sublime and
sweetest impressions I ever felt in my travels. It was the land to
which were directed all my present thoughts as a man and a
traveller; the sacred land, the land where I sought, from so great a
distance, the recollections of our primitive human nature.
Alphonse de Lamartine, A Pilgrimage to the Holy Land (1838)
Their spirit instinctively warns the passerby that he is amongst a
race of freemen.
Charles H. Churchill, Mount Lebanon: A Ten Years’
Residence, from 1842 to 1852 (1853)
”W
ho dares be skeptical at the foot of Lebanon?” asked Gérard de Ner-
val, French traveler and author of Voyage en Orient. “Is this shore not the
cradle of all the beliefs in the world? Ask the first Mountaineer that you
come across: he will tell you that it was on this land that the first scenes of
the Bible took place; he will guide you to the place where the first sacrifices
were offered; he will show you the rock stained by the blood of Abel.”1 For
the very reasons that Nerval identified—the biblical landscape, the stun-
ning beauty of the mountain chain overlooking Beirut, which appeared to
be an inviolate sanctuary—Europeans viewed Mount Lebanon as an ideal
site for the reformation of the Ottoman Empire. What their eyes took in as
they contemplated the panorama of mountain and sea was not “a terra
incognita.”2 Modern technology, through the production of texts and their
distribution to a wide audience; improved communications; and fast ships,
which transported painters and poets in record numbers, brought the Ori-
ent into the homes of “Christian readers” on an unprecedented scale in the
nineteenth century. Writings and paintings evoked a timeless biblical land,
a mountain refuge, that pleaded to be saved from Islamic Ottoman domi-
nation.3 The parallel lack of interest in Mount Lebanon on the part of Ot-
15


[PDF page 34]
16 / The Gentle Crusade
tomans gave European travelers room to explore without hindrance from
imperial officials. More important, it left them as the unchallenged
prophets of the cultural redemption and salvation of Mount Lebanon.
Between poets and writers such as Nerval, who exuded a supreme con-
fidence in European hegemony, and missionaries such as Paul Riccadonna
and Benoît Planchet, who strove to be the benevolent face of that hege-
mony, Mount Lebanon found itself the object of intense, sustained atten-
tion by a host of diverse suitors. Some were content to describe and cele-
brate the land as they saw it; others wanted to save and reform its
inhabitants; most tried their hand at both. In any case, the cumulative
presence on the land of so many Western writers, travelers, missionaries,
painters, and poets heralded the dawn of a gentle crusade in Mount
Lebanon. It was gentle in the sense that it was not a military expedition: it
sought no territorial gain; it was actively courted by native elites, and it ad-
vanced itself primarily through the pen and paintbrush rather than the
sword and musket. It was a crusade in the sense that the sum of the travel-
ers’ experiences allegedly reclaimed the history of this region from the
morass of decline and the stagnation of time. It was a crusade also in the
sense that most travelers imagined themselves to be involved in a historic
clash between Christian progress and Islamic despotism, a clash in which
they alone held the keys to knowledge and interpretation. They insisted
that they narrated and judged with the experience of natives but that such
authenticity was tempered by the “superiority of a European who looks
down from the height of Christian civilization.”4 Finally, it was a crusade
because travelers and missionaries were the vanguard of an age of reform
that in the name of modernity quite simply overwhelmed Mount Lebanon.
The gentle crusade was premised on the notion that the Ottoman Em-
pire delenda est (as Richard Burton put it).5 But it was also rooted in the
conviction that certain communities in it could be redeemed through the
active intercession of the “civilized” world. One result, therefore, of indi-
vidual voyages undertaken by men like Constantin de Volney, Charles
Henry Churchill, and Alphonse de Lamartine as well as of the collective ef-
forts of Jesuit and Protestant missionaries was a crystallization of the idea
that the natives of Mount Lebanon were waiting to be reformed and re-
connected with what Johannes Fabian has described as the evolutionary
“stream of Time.”6 Another result (whose consequences will be taken up
in later chapters) was that it laid the foundations of a Maronite and (to a
lesser extent) Druze perception that France and England were the loci of a
benevolent modernity and that they, as Maronites or Druzes, were entitled
to it. How this gentle crusade was articulated by its participants and why it


[PDF page 35]
The Gentle Crusade / 17
should have—as David Urquhart put it—“withdrawn [Mount Lebanon]
from an existence of insignificance” are questions that this chapter ex-
plores.7
Travelers had long come to the biblical lands, but in the late eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries their arrival coincided with, even reflected,
broader developments both in Europe and the Ottoman Empire that cre-
ated a solid basis for the travelers’ claims to be heralds of modernity to the
“tribes” of Mount Lebanon.8 Drawing on an established motif of Mount
Lebanon as a pristine refuge, these visitors exhibited a heightened cultural
interest in the region that was set against the backdrop of Syria’s incorpo-
ration into a European-dominated world economy and the momentous
changes ushered in by the French and Industrial Revolutions.9 In Mount
Lebanon’s rural inhabitants, the travelers saw revolutionaries and counter-
revolutionaries, papists and highlanders—in short, all that related them to
the dynamism of European history. At the same time, however, the travel-
ers paradoxically insisted that Maronites and Druzes belonged to an inert
world that was surrounded, and to some extent contaminated, by an Ori-
ental decadence.
narratives of stagnation and redemption
Among the most famous of the travelers was Volney, whose influential
portrait of Mount Lebanon shaped much of the romantic discourse of nine-
teenth-century travel writing. Left with an unexpected bequest of money,
Volney chose to visit the Orient, beginning in Egypt and moving on to
Syria and Mount Lebanon. During his two-year voyage between 1783 to
1785, Volney spent eight months in Mount Lebanon.
On the face of it, Volney’s work, Voyage en Égypte et en Syrie, was sim-
ply the first of the great works of modern travel writing and description.10
Certainly, as Edward Said has argued, Volney’s portraits were to have a
tremendous impact on later voyagers and travelers who, almost to a per-
son, cite him, applaud him, and occasionally correct him.11 Volney was a
man of the Enlightenment. His work was suffused with its vocabulary, and
his humanism motivated him to travel to Asia to better understand the na-
ture of “despotism,” under which his native France labored. His arguments
about the nature of the Orient and the Orientals provided a ready stage
from which to criticize France’s absolute monarchy. His vehement denun-
ciations of the upper Maronite clergy were in obvious but unstated com-
parison to the corrupt First Estate. Taking his brief stay as a sufficient
length of time to judge the character and nature of the Orient, Volney


[PDF page 36]
Map 2. Carte d’une partie de la Syrie et de la Palestine (From Pierre Marie François Pagès, Voyages autour du monde
et vers les deux poles, par terre et par mer, pendant les années 1767, 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, 1773, 1774, & 1776. Paris:
Moutard, 1782)


[PDF page 37]
The Gentle Crusade / 19
wove an epic narrative—never for a moment questioning his own tran-
sience and, in fact, criticizing those travelers who were more concerned
with the antiquities than with the people.12 His central question was how
such splendid power in Asia could deteriorate so fast and under what con-
ditions its decline could be arrested.
He found his answer in the nature of government and religion. To Vol-
ney, the results of political despotism were obvious. In the Orient, there
was a total absence of the notion of public good among the “Turks,” for in
Volney’s eyes the pashas were rapacious, and everybody was the Sultan’s
slave. The reason for the “indolence” of the Oriental, despite his
“lethargy,” his “silence,” and his “inscrutability,” was the despotism of the
Sultan. In addition, however, there was the question of “Islam.” Volney
claimed the Oriental’s “fanatic superstition” was the cause for a “thousand
disorders.” Moreover, unlike “us” in Europe, where Volney assumed there
was free communication between the sexes, he insisted that in the Orient
women were shut off from society. The harem, stated Volney, was as fatal
to the moral conduct of the men in whose hand political power rested, as it
was injurious to the women.13
Only in Mount Lebanon did he see the “ray of liberty” breaking
through the cloud of Turkish and Oriental despotism. Put up in various
monasteries by Maronites who welcomed the Frenchman in their midst,
Volney described the reasons for the persistence in the East of the Chris-
tian Maronites. He saw first the “insurmountable barrier” between Maro-
nites and Muslims, which prevented the ambitious Maronites from unit-
ing with “the stranger” to betray their nation. He also argued that the
difficulty of the terrain and the imperative to unite in the face of enemies
pushed the Maronites into a rocky outpost. To Volney, Mount Lebanon
was a haven from Islam, in which the Druzes too enjoyed the benefits of
their relatively isolated existence. Volney remarked that the Druzes nur-
tured a “republican spirit” but that both they and the Maronites were con-
stantly under threat from the corrupting influence of absolute Ottoman
power.14
Amidst the supposed stagnation of Syria, Volney thought he discerned
timeless communities who yearned to be free and to be set on the path of
progress. Volney thought Mount Lebanon unique because of its non-Mus-
lim population, its relation to the Holy Land, and its mountainous and
rugged terrain, which provided a welcome contrast, in his eyes, to the
coastal cities and their Muslim populations. He was not alone in making
this observation. The flamboyant Churchill reiterated exactly this point
when he noted that the mountaineers had “a determination and a spirit of


[PDF page 38]
20 / The Gentle Crusade
independence, which unequivocally indicate that the metal of freemen is
lurking within their breasts.”15 Yet Volney was careful to point out that
Mount Lebanon’s uniqueness had been contaminated by its proximity to
Islam. According to the French writer, to free and to reform Mount
Lebanon was to reincarnate a distant past which he claimed to represent on
the basis of a shared Christian heritage and which he desired to reinvigo-
rate at the expense of a more recent, darker, and more unfamiliar history.
Volney, therefore, was at once drawn to and repulsed by Mount Lebanon—
both at home in and alienated from it.
Other travelers elaborated on this theme of stagnation and redemption.
Churchill, for example, framed the task as leading the Orient from the
stagnant present, literally from the dearth of hope and the death of time, to
a future filled with promise and progress:
This East, which may yet become seat and centre of the Universal
Reign!, it also has claims on England’s watchful vigilance and sympa-
thising care, and already invokes her guardian Æegis.
A general, and possibly not incorrect belief is now prevalent, that a
revolution of hitherto unprecedented magnitude is closely impending
over these interesting regions; one by which they will at length be made
amenable to the vivifying impulses of social and political amelioration—
16
one in fact, which will deliver them from the bonds of death unto life.
Concern for the fate of the region’s Christian (and to a lesser extent
Druze) inhabitants propelled men like Volney and Churchill to study and
decipher the customs and manners of the natives. As in other travel ac-
counts of Europeans in the New World, in Asia, and in Africa, the manners
and customs were described as unchanging and hence easily recordable.
Churchill apologized in advance to his readers, explaining that the “con-
stant repetition of events so nearly similar in their form and complexion,
the perpetual recurrence of actuating motives, so invariably the same in all
parties concerned, made it difficult for me to be correct and full, without
being monotonous.”17 Even critics of European imperialism, such as
Urquhart, felt compelled to describe Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants as “a
primordial society.” “Its children,” he noted, “looked down on events in
their course, races in their toil, and ignored history by defying fortune.”18
Neither Volney nor Churchill conceived of themselves as strangers
among the Maronites. Certainly Volney cast himself as the omniscient ob-
jective narrator on one level, but on another he felt some connection with
the people of Mount Lebanon; he could extend to them a sympathy that he
felt he could not extend to the Muslims of the Orient. In fact, he felt that


[PDF page 39]
The Gentle Crusade / 21
the Muslims who lived in the Orient were “strangers” to the Maronites,
while he as a Frenchman was not. Here lay the central paradox of all Vol-
ney’s writings on the Orient. Although he was aligned against political
despotism and was opposed to the tyranny of entrenched Catholicism, Vol-
ney’s preoccupation with Islam’s difference from Christianity pushed him
in the direction of those religious communities which he perceived to be
the farthest from Islam. In his opinion, which he elaborated on in his later
work, Les Ruines, ou méditation sur les révolutions des empires, suivies de
la loi naturelle, salvation could come only from a rational, republican, even
revolutionary France and could take root in Mount Lebanon.
The French Revolution, however, never arrived in the Orient. Instead,
on the one hand, Napoleon invaded Egypt masquerading as a Muslim—
much to the disdain of the Egyptian chronicler Jabarti—and, on the other
hand, Lazarist priests and other refugees came seeking the “sanctuary” of
Mount Lebanon, where they waited out the “evil days” of the French Rev-
olution.19 Contrary to Volney’s hopes, France did not provide a revolution-
ary death blow to “Oriental despotism.” Drawing on France’s historic ties
with the Maronites, priests and émigré princes came to take shelter among
the people they had vowed to protect.20 As they wandered through Mount
Lebanon, climbed the slopes, and descended into the valleys, they lived the
counterrevolution. They too wanted to save Mount Lebanon, but unlike
Volney they desired to save it both from itself and from the scourge of the
Revolution. They brought with them their fears of Freemasons and of Jews
and added to those the greatest of all fears, that of Islam. In the “refuge” of
Lebanon, the ancien régime survived and even flourished. The local Chris-
tian chroniclers had heard with great dismay that the “gates of hell have
opened and the Lord of Darkness has emerged.”21 They welcomed to their
land the victims of the great calamity, encouraged by the fact that post-
revolutionary French governments generally instructed their ambassadors
in Istanbul to protect the missions and the missionaries.22
Into this environment, where Europeans lived “like a colony totally re-
moved from the laws of the land,”23 the poet Alphonse de Lamartine ar-
rived in 1832. For him the “refuge” of Lebanon provided a secure base
from which to conduct his “pilgrimage” to the Holy Land.24 Lamartine re-
lated to the East through his familiarity with New and Old Testament nar-
ratives, and his experience in the East became a journey of recovery and
immersion in specific Christian icons, symbols, and terrain. Lamartine was
no ordinary traveler, for he recognized that his observations were “neither
science, nor history, nor geography nor customs” but “fragments” written
in the shadow of a palm tree in the midday sun or in the cell of a Maronite


[PDF page 40]
22 / The Gentle Crusade
convent. Lamartine left the turmoil of politics and the corruption of ideals
behind him in France. He escaped, as he put it, from an unspiritual and
“crumbling Europe.”25
Lamartine believed that in Mount Lebanon the battle for Christianity
and for spirituality could be fought and won. He thought that a new Chris-
tian could be born and a new spirituality could be fostered which would ul-
timately save Europe from its own destructive “passions.” The passive
Orient, “a sterile and dead branch of humanity,” could be used; its vast
space could be harnessed; and its distinctively Christian Maronite popula-
tion could be the vanguard of a spiritual renaissance. “The Maronite peo-
ple, be they descended from Arabs or Syrians, share all the virtues of their
clergy, and constitute a people distinct from all others in the Orient, one
might say a European colony haphazardly cast into the midst of desert
tribes. Their personal appearance, however, is Arab.”26
Lamartine’s first glimpses of the Holy Land on the afternoon of 5 Sep-
tember 1832 left him overwhelmed with the emotions of a homecoming.
“It was the Holy Land,” he scribbled in his diary, and that said it all. When
the “Arabs” carried him to shore at Beirut, Lamartine was met by a con-
sular agent sent by Henri Guys, to whom Lamartine carried a letter of in-
troduction. During his visit, Lamartine was given the title of “the foreign
prince” by local inhabitants. While he gloried in “the titles, riches, and the
virtues which the Arab imagination has given me,” the French poet con-
fessed that the European consuls “are good enough not to disabuse them,
and to let a humble poet pass for a powerful man of Europe.”27
Perhaps even more than Lamartine, Lady Hester Stanhope, William
Pitt’s troubled niece—who was described in a local chronicle as “the
daughter of the sister of the English sultan’s vizier”28—represented the at-
tempt of European writers and travelers to escape from Europe and to take
refuge in the supposedly timeless fastness of Mount Lebanon. Lamartine
himself had heard much about this enigmatic lady, who came from a bro-
ken household, whose father was a pronounced Jacobin sympathizer, and
who allegedly found herself suffocating in the restrictions of Victorian so-
ciety.29 She liberally bestowed money on a large number of functionaries,
and she was consequently well received. It was even said that she was un-
der the protection of the Sultan himself.30 She was, with her shaven head,
her habit of smoking pipes, and her cross-dressing, a parody of the wan-
dering European. She insisted on proclaiming herself “Queen of the
Arabs,” and Lamartine himself said that “she has a great name in the Ori-
ent.” He added “I considered that among the most interesting days of my
voyage were those in which I got to know a woman who is herself one of


[PDF page 41]
The Gentle Crusade / 23
the marvels of the Orient that I had come to visit.”31 She styled herself
Zenobia’s successor and surrounded herself with servants and slaves whom
she called a “pack of thieves.”32 That William Pitt’s estranged niece had
come to represent the Orient which Lamartine sought out was sympto-
matic of the self-contained European fantasy which no local could pene-
trate. Lady Hester, when she finally met Lamartine, was dressed in “Ori-
ental” costume and insisted that her own female housekeeper be veiled.
She told the poet what he already knew. “Europe is finished. . . . You will,”
she continued between deep drags of her favorite amber pipe, “go back to
the Occident, but it will not be long before you return to the Orient—for
it is your patrie.” To this Lamartine philosophically repled, “It is at least,
the patrie of my imagination.”33
inventing tribes
European imagination invented the tribes of Lebanon. While most ac-
counts reminisced about a biblical topography, they invariably enumerated
and described the different communities that lived in Mount Lebanon. The
success of Volney, Lamartine, Churchill, and Jesuit and American mission-
aries depended on creating a coherent typology of Maronites, Druzes,
Greek Orthodox, Shi‘a, Sunni, and Greek Catholics. Naturally, they bor-
rowed freely from one another, and they filtered their own varied experi-
ences through a common conceptual language of native difference and sep-
arateness—so that although Druzes and Maronites often lived in the same
village, shared the same customs, and owed allegiance to the same nota-
bles, they were nevertheless described separately in Western literature and
therefore were imagined and experienced separately in Mount Lebanon.
The various explorers and missionaries constructed, in other words, a dis-
course of Mount Lebanon’s tribal characteristics, say of Druze bellicosity,
which was largely self-referential (Churchill borrows from Volney, Jessup
from Churchill). This discourse existed and was distributed textually and
reinforced anecdotally, and from the outset it framed and enmeshed every
traveler’s experience.34 I am not suggesting that these religious communi-
ties did not exist or that travelers’ accounts were false or fabricated, but in-
stead that they were conceptualized in certain terms (tribal, free, stagnant,
separate) that did not correspond to the way the inhabitants of Mount
Lebanon perceived themselves. Such a discourse, which traditional native
knowledge could scarcely penetrate, had a tremendous impact on local so-
ciety as nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon became the venue for com-
peting Ottoman and European notions of reform and progress.


[PDF page 42]
24 / The Gentle Crusade
The British and American characterization of the Druzes illustrated one
facet of the incommensurability of Western and local understandings of
Mount Lebanon. The British authors thought themselves particularly well
suited, because of their intimate connections and conversations with the
Druze elites, to represent them to Western audiences. Certainly French
travelers, especially in the beginning of the century, took an active interest
in the Druzes, who were in some accounts considered to be the descendants
of a Latin colony led by the Comte de Dreux, just as British and other trav-
elers did not shy away from Maronite regions. As the century advanced
and as the region was further drawn into the vicissitudes of rival mission-
ary movements and the politics of the so-called Eastern Question, the
French increasingly traveled, resided, and felt most comfortable in the
Maronite parts of Lebanon, whereas the Protestant travelers explored and
recommended the hospitality of the Druzes with increasing vigor.
The Druzes were objects of a curious sympathy which, on the one hand,
elevated them to the ranks of freemen and, on the other hand, regarded
them as the most romantic of the Lebanese tribes. “The physiognomy of
the Druse,” wrote one author, “is noble, grave, and sometimes even char-
acterised by an expression of high spirit not untinctured with ferocity.”35
American missionaries, who were themselves continually haunted by their
failure to produce enough converts among the “nominal” Christians of
Mount Lebanon, sent home ever rosier reports of the potential for a mass
conversion among the Druzes. Accordingly, the Druzes were described in
the following manner in the Missionary Herald in 1838: “The Druses, al-
though inconsiderable as to number, are a remarkable sect, (1). As an ex-
crescence of Mohammedanism, having somewhat the same relation to Mo-
hammedans that the Mohammedans have to Christians; (2). As holding
very peculiar doctrines, which have not yet been revealed, except partially;
and (3). As maintaining a free and independent spirit in the midst of des-
potism, owing perhaps to the mountainous nature of their country.”36
The force of such a description, which was culled from a variety of
sources including Volney, lay not only in the effort to make the Druzes
comprehensible to the Missionary Herald readers in terms that quite
clearly would have made no sense to a Druze but also in the implicit as-
sumption that this was the only way to understand the Druzes. Whereas a
Druze might have thought that his religion was coherent, the missionaries
noted that it was little more than an “excrescence” or, as they put it in
1836, “a compound of paganism, Mohammedanism, and Christianity.”
Whereas he might have considered himself part of a complex, living,
evolving multicommunal culture, the missionaries viewed him as a mem-


[PDF page 43]
The Gentle Crusade / 25
ber of a “singular race” in a divided sectarian and tribal society.37 For their
part, British writers often sought to identify the Druzes with the Scottish
highlanders.38 “The gathering of the clans, as described by Volney, an eye-
witness,” suggested one author, “forcibly reminds us of the speeding of the
fiery cross in former days along the braes and glens of Scotland.”39 Even
beyond resembling the highlanders, the Druzes themselves, the travelers
alleged, boasted that a branch of the Druze people lived in “Jebel-el-
Scouzia,” or the Scottish Highlands.40 Urquhart claimed to have found
amongst the Lebanese (even though it was in a Christian village) a “per-
fect” tartan of ancient usage which resembled that of the Stuarts.41 The
weapons that the villagers of Mount Lebanon carried also reminded some
British travelers of the highlanders.42 Churchill regarded both the Maro-
nites and the Druzes as “sturdy Highlanders. 43
English and Scottish accounts of Mount Lebanon constructed a mythic
image of the Druze chieftain, who was the authors’ only contact with the
local population, as a highland clan leader. This image provided the writers
with an “authentic” source who could stand for the whole of this “warlike”
people. The Druze leaders were authentic not just because they appealed to
a romantic British notion of highland chiefs—a notion which, according to
Hugh Trevor-Roper, was invoked at roughly the same period44—but be-
cause they served as interlocutors with the East. In their fine homes and as
guests of their gracious hospitality, British writers could confidently ex-
pound on the “realities” of the Druze experience; they could relate the cus-
toms and manners of the Druze race, tribe, or nation and contrast them
with the general state of the Ottoman Empire, which was uncharitably
deemed to be in irrevocable decline. Above all, such descriptions of Mount
Lebanon’s Druze elites typified a strong yearning to remake the local elites
into what they were not: “authentic” sources for a tribal society, highland
chieftains, or, in the words of an American missionary, “patterns of ‘gen-
tlemen’ in manners and courtesy.”45 It was of little consequence to travel-
ers and missionaries that the local elites did not identify themselves as such
and in fact saw themselves as far grander and more illustrious personages
than mere leaders of premodern clans.
Perhaps the foreign missionaries best exemplify the spirit of the gentle
crusade and reflect the intrusive power of nineteenth-century Western
imagination. They provide the clearest example of the will of Europeans
and Americans to shape the land according to their expectations, regardless
of and indeed despite the realities they found on the ground. Jesuit mis-
sionaries in particular had reason for confidence. Theirs was among the
oldest missions to the Orient.46 In 1831, they were invited back by the


[PDF page 44]
26 / The Gentle Crusade
Greek Catholic and Maronite Churches, who had heard “with joy” of the
resurrection of the Company of Jesus.47 And like their predecessors before
the suppression of their order in 1773, they were driven by the exhortation
to join their fellow Christians, who were thought to be suffering griev-
ously in “cruel servitude” to an Islamic despotism.48 Three Jesuits— one
Italian, Paul Riccadonna, one Frenchman, Benoît Planchet, and one Ger-
man doctor, Henri Henze—sallied forth. They were armed with instruc-
tions from their superior general, Jean Roothaan in Rome, to maintain at
all costs their humility and chastity “among a people whose morals may be
licentious.” They were also warned that they must above all maintain their
union: “for those of you who are to be found in a country so distant, sepa-
rated from your brothers, this must be your principal consolation.” What
is more, added Roothaan, they “must be alert so that nobody should be
given the impression that his ignorance, his lack of culture, the harshness
of his manners causes you repugnance.”49
Prepared to encounter the “Orient which was always sympathetic to
France,” the Jesuits embarked on the Will of God. After a rough crossing,
described by Riccadonna as one tormented by the “demons” who had tried
to finish the company at sea by inducing tempests and contrary winds,
they arrived in the harbor of Beirut. From their vessel they could appreci-
ate the splendid beauty of the land, the orchards and groves and palm trees,
and behind the city the dramatic, snow-capped Mt. Sanin. Dressed in Arab
costume, they disembarked. Riccadonna confessed that at once “we were
surrounded by a mass of turbans, by staffs and pistols. . . . I can assure
you,” he added, “that at first we were overcome by a secret shudder [fris-
son].” They walked, eyes to the ground, refusing to notice either the
camels or “all the other new things” that they passed. In their pockets they
had letters of introduction for the European consuls to whom the Jesuits
had been recommended. Suddenly and much to their relief, a native
Catholic identified himself from within the indistinct “crowd of Muslims”
and led them by hand to his house.50
But this encounter provided the Jesuits with little relief, for instead of
finding the Catholics they had expected to find, they were confronted with
a reality for which they were not prepared: the confusing similarity of
Christian to Muslim in manners, dress, and habits. Riccadonna was hard
pressed to recall Roothaan’s instructions not to show disgust, as he re-
strained his instinct to judge and condemn the “Orient.” In the house of
their Christian host, the discomfort of sitting cross-legged on the Dama-
scene carpets and the strength of the pipe tobacco forced the Jesuits to
abandon their efforts at graciousness. The hard floors, their aching legs,


[PDF page 45]
The Gentle Crusade / 27
and the insects that plagued them at night only added to their initial mis-
ery in the land of Christ. The call to prayer—from the mosques of the
city—reminded the Jesuits that they were in “enemy” territory, and the
dogs barking in the narrow city streets only added to their sense of alien-
ation from the “Orient” they had thought was their own. Riccadonna
could not but exclaim in exasperation that the people were “twenty cen-
turies behind European culture.”51
The disjuncture between expectation and experience felt by Riccadonna
went deeper. Not only were the Orientals, including the Christians, differ-
ent, they were physically revolting. Riccadonna complained that their
“guttural language, which one might say befits camels” (and which the Je-
suits still had not learned), grated on their European ears. He noted the
“savage customs and rough and rude manners of the people with whom
one must live.” And he loathed the “perpetual company of an ignorant,
uneducated, heretical people, Muslims, Druzes and infidels” who practiced
no discernible “religion.”52 Riccadonna’s commentary indicated his alien-
ation from a Christian society which he refused to recognize, and, more
important, which he openly wanted to dismantle and destroy. “The Chris-
tians here are so only in name. And now to this are added the Egyptians,
the emissaries of Satan, the liberals, the carbonari, the biblists, the
methodists, the saint-simoniens, sodomites and others, and all have the
liberty to proselytize. Oh Lord! What woe! What horror!” 53 Riccadonna’s
dismay, finally, was not caused by the lack of Christianity in local society.
Precisely the opposite: his horror lay in his realization that it was indeed
there but in a form comprehensible to him only as repellent and corrupt
and in a world allegedly centuries behind that of European culture. It is to
this premodern place, that is to say a society that did not (yet) define itself
on a temporal scale of modernization, that we must now turn.
