[PDF page 46]
3 Knowledge and Ignorance
W
hen an Ottoman admiral, Halil Pasha, was ordered to inspect the con-
dition of Mount Lebanon in the turbulent years of the mid-nineteenth
century, he immediately paid a visit to the exiled emir of Mount Lebanon,
Bashir Shihab. According to the memoirs of Bashir’s principal advisor, af-
ter the usual compliments and after the dispensation of coffee, sherbet, and
sweets—signs of prestige that Bashir was loathe to forgo even in the ig-
nominy of exile—the Pasha turned to his host and asked how he had man-
aged to rule Mount Lebanon for so long and what could he tell him about
the nature of the region’s inhabitants. Bashir, after all, had ruled Mount
Lebanon (with a few brief interludes) from 1788 until his fall in 1840.
“Efendim,” replied Bashir, “it is true that I ruled for that long, but every
three or four years [the inhabitants] would rebel, although they never suc-
ceeded. I would kill, hang, imprison and beat without opposition to make
them submit.” As for their nature, Bashir contented himself by relating
the following proverb. “Efendim,” he said at length, “there is a bird in
Mount Lebanon called Abu Far, which hunts mice. He is bigger than a fal-
con and perches on a high tree. When the sun rises, he looks to his shadow
and sees it larger than it actually is and so he tells himself ‘Today, I must
hunt a camel.’ But as the sun rises higher, his shadow grows proportionally
smaller until the sun looms over his head; then Abu Far looks to his
shadow and sees it smaller than it actually is, and so he settles on hunting
mice.”1
At first glance, such wistful admissions by Bashir, who described him-
self as “an old man, melancholy and aged, powerless and stooping to the
level of poverty,” seem incongruous with his standing as the founding fa-
ther of modern Lebanese history.2 The metaphorical and physical worlds
that Bashir inhabited have little in common with twentieth-century
28


[PDF page 47]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 29
Lebanese descriptions of their country’s history and with earlier European
perceptions of a romantic refuge. Contrary to Lamartine’s depiction of a
spiritual haven and contrary to a Lebanese historiography that has con-
structed (indeed is dependent on) a narrative of national tolerance cor-
rupted by sectarianism, violence existed in pre-1860 Ottoman Lebanese
society, but it consisted primarily of elite violence deployed to reaffirm a
rigid, status-based social order defined as the rule of knowledge over igno-
rance. Local communities did not identify themselves tribally or nation-
ally, and they subsumed their religious identities within a political and
public space that accommodated differences of faith.3 Ottoman Lebanese
society was shaped less by centuries of sectarian tolerance (or strife) than
by a social order that, heuristically speaking, cut Mount Lebanon in two.
At the top, an elite community regarded its control over religious and sec-
ular knowledge as essential to a hierarchical ordering of society. This com-
munity included Lebanese notables and those who chronicled their histo-
ries as well as Ottoman government officials and religious leaders. It
existed above, exploited, and defined itself against the second community,
the ahali, or the common Druze and Maronite villagers constituting the
bulk of indigenous society. The aim of this chapter is to sketch the outlines
of social order in this multireligious society and to explore the nature of vi-
olence that regulated this order.
the genealogical geography of mount lebanon
Long before the first missionaries arrived to reform them, Christians had
been living in Mount Lebanon. Maronites settled in Mount Lebanon dur-
ing the tenth and eleventh centuries following persecution by the Byzan-
tines. During the Crusades, the Maronite Church entered into a formal
union with Rome but maintained its autonomy and its Syriac liturgy. Ini-
tially the Maronites settled in the northern reaches of Mount Lebanon, in
Qannubin, which served as the seat of the Maronite patriarchate. Over
time, their monasteries developed from remote refuges, inconspicuously
nestled along the sheer sides of the Lebanese mountains, to splendid struc-
tures.4 By the nineteenth century a considerable Christian population was
spread across Mount Lebanon, including the southern Druze-dominated
regions.5 The Druzes first appeared in the eleventh century and established
themselves in the southern part of Mount Lebanon and various regions of
southwestern Syria.6 In addition to Druzes and Maronites, there were also
significant Greek Orthodox and Catholic as well as Shi‘a communities that
dwelled in and around Mount Lebanon.7 Several parts of Mount Lebanon


[PDF page 48]
30 / Knowledge and Ignorance
were home to a religiously mixed population. Regional accents aside, both
Christian and Druze shared a common culture and a common respect of
agricultural cycles, were bound by the same customs and hierarchies, and
submitted to the same lords. Like all other peoples of the area, the local in-
habitants placed tremendous stock in their religious identities. For the vast
majority of the religiously mixed population, life in Mount Lebanon was a
struggle to reconcile conflicting pulls. Leaders and villagers, priests and
townspeople eked out a precarious existence within a coherent world that
had two cardinal limits: those set by God and those set by the temporal
elites who claimed to rule with God’s mandate.
Mount Lebanon was a region that straddled three Ottoman vilayets
(eyalets), or provinces. To the north of Mount Lebanon was the vilayet of
Tripoli; to its east was the important vilayet of Damascus; to the south was
that of Sayda (Sidon), which was specifically established in 1660 to keep a
firm grip on Mount Lebanon and the surrounding hinterlands. Although
the idea of Lebanon as an independent nation did not exist, the Ottoman
government accepted a certain degree of autonomy for Mount Lebanon.8
Ultimate authority after 1660, however, always rested with the Ottoman
governor of the vilayet of Sayda. Historically, the term Mount Lebanon
(Jabal Lubnan) referred to the mountain range on the western fringes of
the area the Mamelukes had called Bilad al-Sham and that the Ottomans
simply called Suriye, or Syria, in the nineteenth century.9 The southern
part of Mount Lebanon was often referred to in local chronicles as Jabal al-
Duruz (Ott. Cebel-i Düruz or Dürzi Dag˘ı), or the Mountain of the Druze,
or simply as Jabal al-Shuf. The northern part was sometimes described as
Jabal Kisrawan, or the Mountain of Kisrawan. Indeed, only in the begin-
ning of the nineteenth century, under the rule of Bashir Shihab, did the
term Mount Lebanon become widespread (especially among European
travelers), and it was only in the mid-nineteenth century that it was finally
adopted by the Ottoman authorities (as Cebel-i Lübnan) to signify a co-
herent and separate entity.
There was nothing impermeable about Mount Lebanon, although the
physical landscape was crisscrossed by several rivers which formed its nat-
ural boundaries. Trade and economy organically linked Mount Lebanon to
the rest of Syria. Wheat was not produced in Mount Lebanon, and, there-
fore, the major staple had to be imported from other Syrian regions, such
as the Bekaa and the Hawran. Commodities produced in Mount Lebanon,
like silk, were exported primarily to local and regional markets, such as
Damascus.10 Travel was not often undertaken, and those who did travel,
the makaris (or muleteers), were the men who brought a village into con-
tact with other villages and towns on a regular basis. Caravansaries, or


[PDF page 49]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 31
rest stations, were built along the Beirut-Damascus road, which cut across
Mount Lebanon. There were several on the coastal road in Jbayl and in Ju-
niya; there were also some higher up like the one in Mdayrij.11 The cities
that surrounded Mount Lebanon— Tripoli, Beirut, Sayda, Damascus, and
Acre—were walled citadels where the urban confronted the rural.12
The largest towns in Mount Lebanon, such as Dayr al-Qamar, were
small in comparison with the major cities of Syria. Six hours by horseback
from Beirut, Dayr al-Qamar served as an entrepôt for the villages of the
Shuf. It was one of the major artisanal centers of the Mountain. Dayr al-
Qamar clothed the shaykhs of Mount Lebanon. Makers of wool shawls and
silk and cotton textiles, blacksmiths, tailors, soap manufacturers, tanners,
and bakers as well as a silk weighing machine could all be found in Dayr al-
Qamar. Before 1860, according to one of its inhabitants, it boasted of hav-
ing three hundred looms.13 Predominantly Maronite, it also had a sizable
Druze population. Its markets were stocked with goods from Aleppo,
Sidon, and Damascus. Its merchants loaned money to the great landown-
ing families and built large houses, and from its population the emirs of
Mount Lebanon often chose scribes and secretaries, such as Mikhayil
Mishaqa and Rustum Baz.14 Not surprisingly Bashir Shihab built his
palace across the valley from Dayr al-Qamar, in Bayt al-Din. Although
Dayr al-Qamar was called the “city of Lebanon,” its inhabitants were
known to each other. And like other villages in Mount Lebanon, Dayr al-
Qamar was under the control of a notable family, in this case the Druze
Abu Nakad shaykhs. In addition to rivers and ravines, the various elite
families gave each region its overarching identity; they carved out spheres
of influence and autonomously administered districts as muqata‘jis. They
collected taxes, maintained tranquillity, and assured good government over
the ahali. They defined and gave expression to a genealogical geography,
for Mount Lebanon was divided not religiously but according to various
districts inherited by important families.15
Of these, the Shihabs ranked first. Like many of the important families,
the Shihabs were divided into rival households which competed for the
privilege to rule Mount Lebanon. They and two other families, the Chris-
tian Abilam‘s and the Druze Arslans, were the only princely families of
Mount Lebanon.16 The Abilam‘s’ stronghold was the Matn district; the
Arslans dominated the Gharb district. Next in line came those who were
ranked as muqaddams, such as the Shi‘a Hamada family who came from
the Hirmil region and originally ruled large areas of the Kisrawan dis-
trict—although by the nineteenth century they had long since lost their
grip on the Kisrawan, which passed quite firmly into the hands of the
Maronite families.17 Following the muqaddams in prestige were the


[PDF page 50]
Map 3. Old-regime Mount Lebanon.


[PDF page 51]



[PDF page 52]
34 / Knowledge and Ignorance
shaykhly Druze families; of these, the most powerful was the Janbulat
family, which dominated the Shuf, Iqlim al-Tuffah, Iqlim al-Kharrub,
Iqlim Jazzin, and Jabal Rayhan districts. There were also the ‘Imads in the
‘Urqub district, the Abu Nakads in Manasif and part of the Gharb, the Tal-
huqs in the upper Gharb, and the ‘Abd al-Maliks in the Jurd district. The
Maronites also had important families such as the Khazins, who were lords
of Kisrawan with the exception of the village of Ghazir, which was associ-
ated with the Hubayshes. The rise of the Maronite families was intimately
connected to their allegiance to the Shihabs and to their ties with the
Druze families.18
These great families and the host of smaller, less significant, but
nonetheless important families were interdependent; they shared a code of
conduct, distinctive dress, and similar responsibilities and privileges.
Many notables lived in palaces, entertained lavishly, and even traveled.
Myriad differences nuanced their relationships, but between them and the
ahali of Mount Lebanon was a vast chasm, one defined not only by mate-
rial wealth but by social custom. Never was the title that separated the
shaykh from the ahali forgotten, for according to a contemporary chroni-
cler “in this country there is tremendous preservation of the rank of peo-
ple according to custom, which does not disappear in poverty and cannot be
obtained through wealth.”19 Depending on the rank of his visitor, the Shi-
hab emir would stand up immediately, or he would stand up only after his
guest crossed halfway into the room, or he would stand up only after his
guest bowed to salute him, or he would not stand up at all. He would em-
brace only some families, allow his shoulder to be kissed by others, extend
his hand to be kissed by still others, and he would not even allow some,
mostly the commoners, the privilege of seeing, let alone kissing, his
hand.20
The great divide within Lebanese society was further extended by
forms of letter writing. How much of the paper was written on and where
the fold was made reflected the social standing of the writer and the recip-
ient.21 Certain salutations were used with the shaykhly class, others with
the Ottoman governors, and still others with the Sultan or the Grand
Vizier. The notables were often referred to in Ottoman as söz sahibleri,
those who have a say and the “masters of words” in an overwhelmingly il-
literate society.22 Family rank, to be sure, was not to be taken for granted.
Even a cursory reading of the local chronicles reveals the tragedies and tri-
umphs that beset every notable family. The power of the Shihabs, who
came to power with the blessing of the Ottomans in 1697, was consolidated
only after they defeated their ‘Alam al-Din rivals at the battle of ‘Ayn Dara


[PDF page 53]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 35
in 1711—after which it became, according to Mishaqa, “an established
custom in the land of the Druze that no one would raise a weapon against
a Shihabi emir unless he had another emir with him.”23 Even then, the
power of the Shihabs was always heavily dependent on local alliances and
imperial patronage networks. When in 1797 the Nakad shaykhs were dec-
imated, their lands expropriated, and their families scattered, a contempo-
rary chronicler concluded that the “Nakad name was obliterated.”24 The
historical event, the extirpation of the five Nakad shaykhs, was commem-
orated with a cruel play on words: “Vanquished are the Oppressors who are
called the People of Calamities and Misfortune [ahl al-balaya wa al-
nakad].”25 Just as a name could be “obliterated,” a name could, on rare oc-
casion, also be elevated by the Shihab emir after a particular instance of
loyalty. For example, if a Shihab emir addressed a letter “al akh al-‘aziz,”
that automatically entitled the recipient to the rank of shaykh.6 In either
case, for better or worse, title and rank depended ultimately on loyalty to
the hierarchy, and they were bestowed rather than acquired.
Rank rather than religion was the all-important marker of elite status in
rural Mount Lebanon. Family alliances occurred across religious lines, cre-
ating alternate kinships that transcended differences of faith.27 Bashir Shi-
hab addressed his namesake, the Druze Bashir Janbulat, as his “brother.”
Marriage alliances were stricter. Members of the Shihab family, which it-
self was divided into Christian and Sunni branches, could marry only
within their family or from among the Abilam‘ family.28 Mishaqa, writing
long after the collapse of the old regime, noted that “at that time the mem-
bers of the [Shihab] family married amongst themselves and were uncon-
cerned with a difference in religion.”29 It is not surprising, then, that
Christian and Druze notables took an oath of allegiance at the shrine of the
Virgin Mary, that one loyal Shi‘a emir was buried in the Sunni Shihab
family cemetery and that a Christian merchant funded the construction of
a mosque.30 Even the French poet Lamartine acknowledged that Emir
Bashir appeared to be a Druze to the Druzes, a Christian to the Christians,
and a Muslim to the Muslims. At his palace in Bayt al-Din Bashir built
both a mosque and a church.31 The Arabic word used today to denote a re-
ligious sect, ta’ifa, was in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries often
used to denote a family of rank regardless of its religious persuasion.32 The
great families of Mount Lebanon presented themselves as the intermedi-
aries between religious communities.33 They drew their pride and their so-
cial position from a combination of their religious standing and the respect,
tradition, and reciprocity that they enjoyed with other elite families.
Although belonging to a religious community was intertwined with a


[PDF page 54]
36 / Knowledge and Ignorance
number of secular identities (such as family, village, and rank), there was
an undeniable respect for the sacred boundaries of faith. The public, polit-
ical culture of Mount Lebanon functioned through an unspoken recogni-
tion of the temporality of loyalty: no Ottoman governor lived forever and
no ruler could rely on the automatic allegiance of his subordinates but in-
stead had to be constantly alert to shifting alliances. The private cultures of
faith, however, depended on the strict and absolute loyalty of their respec-
tive believers. As members of religious communities, Druzes and Maro-
nites fully accepted each other with the understanding that neither side
would encroach on the other’s sacred territory; they respected, acknowl-
edged, and often participated in the various Christian and Muslim reli-
gious feasts, ceremonies, and customs that marked a living multicommu-
nal society. Even in times of conflict, “it was the custom in the mountain
in times of unrest to place valuables inside houses of worship, where they
would be respected by the victor.”34 I do not meant to paint a picture of
“tolerance” (for that is to emphasize a discourse on sectarianism that was
not yet present) nor to deny the availability of a language of religious dis-
crimination and differentiation. From shari‘a courts, Ottoman decrees, vil-
lage proverbs, and zajaliyyat (poems in the Arabic vernacular) of the Mar-
onite historian and bishop Ibn al-Qila‘i (d. 1516), it is clear that such a
language existed, but it was subordinate to and enmeshed in a range of
competing discourses of obedience, allegiance, and loyalty inherent in local
society. It presented, in other words, no significant barrier to a social order
founded on the shared values and interests of a nonsectarian political elite.
Conversion was a sin, a treachery that far surpassed that of secular be-
trayal, for secular betrayal could be justified and rationalized, even for-
given and forgotten. Conversion marked an absolute break with the past, a
rejection of heritage and history, and a new beginning. Moreover, it indi-
cated an intrusion by others into a private, sacred sphere of life—a theft
that undermined the very basis of social order, which depended on a quies-
cent and theoretically unchanging religiosity. The zeal for conversion to
the “true” faith expressed by foreign missionaries elicited a generally neg-
ative response from local secular and religious authorities as well as from
the Ottoman government. It provoked a singularly hostile reaction from
the Maronite and Greek Orthodox Churches, especially after Catholic mis-
sionaries succeeded in attracting numerous Orthodox converts in eigh-
teenth-century Aleppo, Damascus, and Mount Lebanon and after Ameri-
can missionaries openly proclaimed the “error” of indigenous Christian
belief. Notables, however, by virtue of their power and influence, were able
to defy such strictures. By the nineteenth century, several branches of the


[PDF page 55]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 37
Shihab family had already converted to Christianity. Because of the status
of their family, those branches of the Shihabs which did convert were not
exposed to charges of apostasy; in fact, they continued to intermarry with
other branches of the family.35 Nevertheless, Bashir Shihab, who was born
a Christian, practiced a studied ambivalence, and maintained a public fic-
tion that he was Muslim, swore on the Quran (as well as the Gospel), for
example, and he distributed alms to the Druze poor. Neither he nor his Ot-
toman masters saw a need to emphasize what would, for an ordinary per-
son, have been a flagrant violation of social norms.36
limits of ottoman influence
In 1516 the Ottoman armies invaded Syria, and until the First World War
they ruled the province continuously (with a brief exception between 1831
and 1840). Ottoman control of Mount Lebanon persisted for four cen-
turies, so by the eighteenth century, if not much earlier, Ottoman rule was
a normal and accepted fact of life.
Mount Lebanon’s proximity to Damascus made its stability and pacifi-
cation a perennial Ottoman concern. When a local ruler became too ambi-
tious, as did Fakhr al-Din, or when its elites became too troublesome, the
Ottomans intervened with brutal force to crush what one Ottoman chron-
icler described as the “jerboas and mice.”37 In general, the rural character
of Mount Lebanon, which so appealed to European travelers in the nine-
teenth century, held little fascination for Ottoman officials, who were oc-
casionally called on to pacify the region, and to the Ottoman governors,
who were meant to rule it. The word Druze, or dürzü in Turkish, was
derogatory and meant scoundrel. To those accustomed to urban Ottoman
culture, Mount Lebanon represented an insignificant backwater inhabited
by those whose rough manners merited not the gentle treatment handed
down to civilized peoples but a summary denouncement; one nineteenth-
century Ottoman military commander referred to an “entirely seditious
people, inherently endowed with the most abominable nature and deserv-
ing of reproach.”38
Nevertheless, protected under the rubric of the Ottoman state’s millet
system, whereby the major non-Muslim communities were granted civil
and religious self-government, the inhabitants of Mount Lebanon were
consigned to benign neglect on the fringes of an imperial Ottoman imagi-
nation.39 The autonomy which was granted to them was not absolute;
rather, as the chronicles bear out year after year, the shaykhs and emirs in-
gratiated themselves with the Ottoman governors—through oral or writ-


[PDF page 56]
38 / Knowledge and Ignorance
ten supplications or gifts and rituals of humility such as kissing a gover-
nor’s hands or the hem of his robe. In return, the ruler of Mount Lebanon
annually received the hil‘at, or ceremonial robe of honor, which confirmed
him in his official position as an Ottoman functionary. By and large, how-
ever, Mount Lebanon was left to its own devices; its notables could and did
preserve their pre-Ottoman traditions as long as they were totally obedi-
ent to their Ottoman masters. Abdullah Pasha’s proclamation to Bashir
Shihab in 1829 summed up the essential nature of the relationship. He
conferred legitimacy on Bashir, and, in exchange, he expected discipline,
prosperity, tranquillity, and security of the imperial subjects, as well as the
prompt deliverance of required taxes and all other obligations, the safe-
guarding of roads, and the eradication without forgiveness of all those who
would sow corruption and transcend their hudud, or limits.40 When Bashir,
following a brief spell of disgrace, again won the favor of Abdullah, the Ot-
toman governor reminded Bashir that “we never for a moment removed
you from our good graces; it was you who allowed doubts and anxieties to
enter your mind which distanced you from our service. It is evident that if
a servant won’t serve his master, the master will find another who
will.”41
Metaphors of subordination were an integral part of Ottoman political
discourse. The Sultan was the “shadow of God on earth,” and all his sub-
jects were, metaphorically, his slaves (kullar or ‘abid). Like a Spanish king
who ruled over an empire in the Americas, the Sultan in the Levant was a
paradoxically absent presence.42 Justice was administered with his “com-
passion,” and in the mosques of the land Friday prayers were said in his
name. He granted equity without equality. The notables and the villagers
constantly sparred over the significance of the Sultan’s name: taxes were
levied in his name, and petitions were addressed to his exalted throne. The
Sultan’s name was an icon that all subjects believed in, a symbol they could
all share, and a recourse beyond local authority. It was also the apex of a
secular loyalty that bound all his subjects.
knowledge and power
All subjects knew they must be loyal to the Sultan. Whereas both com-
moners and notables accepted inherited norms that organized political
space and determined the composition of hierarchy—such as the funda-
mental separation between high and low, rich and poor, elite and
nonelite— only members of the community of knowledge, which included
secular notables, their advisors (the mudabbirs), the upper Christian
clergy, and the Druze mashayikh ‘aql, had the power to explain, legiti-


[PDF page 57]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 39
mate, alter, or otherwise mediate such boundaries. Religious and secular
knowledge were deployed in the service of stability and hierarchy. Al-
though personal law and education lay within the purview of each religious
community, the realms of education, law, and politics reinforced one an-
other; each was an element in maintaining the domain of secular obedience
to the Sultan.43
A symbiotic relationship existed between secular and ecclesiastical au-
thorities of Mount Lebanon. The Druze qadis of the shari‘a court in Dayr
al-Qamar, who judged matters as diverse as inheritance, land and property
ownership, and debt, and whose competence was acknowledged by both
Christian and Druze inhabitants of the Shuf, owed their position to the
Shihab ruler.44 The Maronite Khazin shaykhs (one of whom became patri-
arch in 1845) had a complex and long-standing relationship with the Mar-
onite Church. They were intimately involved in the consolidation of Mar-
onite hegemony in Kisrawan; they involved themselves in Church politics,
but they also donated land to the Church and to the monastic orders in
Mount Lebanon, partially to limit the fragmentation of their estates, par-
tially to relieve themselves of financial responsibilities for unprofitable
monasteries traditionally under their patronage, and partially to receive
spiritual blessing.45 For their part, the Druze elites did not view the Maro-
nite Church as a hostile institution, even with the increasing Latinization
and reform of the Church.46 In several cases, Druze notables funded the
development of monasteries and were themselves called on to mediate in
disputes among Christians.47
In turn, the clergy were exempt from military service, were spared the
trauma of having troops quartered in their homes, and were not subject to
corvée labor.48 They were expected, however, to support the secular pow-
ers, to educate the children of the shaykhs, and to rally the villagers when
and if needed behind causes which may not necessarily have concerned the
villagers themselves. The Maronite patriarch often acted to ensure that the
villages under his spiritual authority abided in “peace, tranquility, and re-
pose” and that villagers remained in “the good graces of the emirs.”49 And
if they did not, the patriarch was quick to invoke divine intervention. In the
eighteenth as in the nineteenth century, excommunication was the patri-
arch’s ultimate recourse with recalcitrant villagers.50 Although the eigh-
teenth century had witnessed a revival of Maronite monasticism, secular
clergy could not afford to be aloof from the rigors of daily life.51 The few
boys destined to become village priests were given a parochial education
comprising basic reading and writing skills.52 This was all they needed to
keep simple accounts and to write simple formulaic petitions in a largely il-


[PDF page 58]
40 / Knowledge and Ignorance
literate society. Village priests, who often inherited their position, oversaw
contracts for buying and selling, wills, sharecropping agreements, and doc-
uments outlining the obligations of peasant families to notables.
Just as the clergy played an essential role in legitimating the social or-
der, the chroniclers (many of whom were priests or monks) recorded its
history. They told the story of an interdependent elite culture that tra-
versed and intersected narrower communities of faith. Although these his-
torians were dismissed by the likes of Churchill, who said of them “to dig-
nify this performance with the title of History, would be absurd,”53 it is in
large part due to them that some semblance of the prereform world still re-
mains today. Compared to Churchill’s closed narrative, where development
and forward movement could come only from without, the local narratives
do not conclude, they end. In other words, chronicles such as Emir Haydar
Ahmad al-Shihabi’s Al-Ghurar al-hisan fi akhbar abna’ al-zaman drew on
several different sources and were not constrained within a teleological
narrative of progress.54
The local histories were meant to be added to by later generations. Per-
haps most illustrative in this respect is the manuscript left behind by
Hananiyya al-Munayyar, a Greek Catholic monk of the monastery of Mar
Yuhanna in Khinshara. His early nineteenth-century chronicle was ur-
gently set to paper to capture the oral histories he had inherited because “it
has been proved that what is not recorded does not endure in the memory.”
He wrote that he had tried to be faithful to the truth but did not know
when his “appointment with death” would arrive, so “I desire that who-
ever reads my book to correct its mistakes, and to he who completes it af-
ter me, full recompense and credit [from God].”55 Some of the chronicles
such as Istifan Duwayhi’s Tarikh al-azmina, span centuries and some, such
as Munayyar’s, span little over a century, from 1697 to 1807. The chroni-
cler never entirely succeeded in removing himself from the history he re-
flected. Unlike Henri Guys, the former French consul whose history of
Mount Lebanon flows from the “superiority of a European who observes
from the heights of Christian civilization,” the local chroniclers were more
attuned to the rhythms of a dynamic society.56
Above all, the scope of the chronicles is impressive. Although they were
concerned principally with Mount Lebanon, the chroniclers understood
that its history was incomprehensible, literally unrecordable, without con-
stant reference to the other provinces of Ottoman Syria. The history of
Mount Lebanon as a separate “refuge” from the world of Islam was not
recorded because it was not conceived of as such. Although all the chroni-


[PDF page 59]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 41
clers mentioned were Christians, they registered no concern over the im-
minent threat to their religion supposedly posed by Muslims—a threat
that consumed the missionaries.57 If anything, it was the arrival of mis-
sionaries that sparked an indigenous concern for the preservation of Chris-
tian faith, for it was the missionaries, and not the Ottomans, who refused
to accept the legitimacy of traditional Christian practice. To writers like
Haydar Ahmad, such terms as decline were as foreign as “the English
princes [who] would travel in Arabistan and observe these countries and
record what they saw.”58 And while these writers certainly made note of
different villages, regions, religions, and cities, the cultural and geographic
integrity and the interconnectedness of the Ottoman world was never for
a moment denied.
The chroniclers reflected the imperial Ottoman discourse that equated
good government with stability and loyalty with order. Far from lacking
interpretation, as has commonly been asserted, their pages were animated
by the divisions of local society—if one can imagine the different groups
of people who carried out the orders of the governors, collected the taxes,
created bonfires to ward off locusts, and hailed returning shaykhs from
long or short exiles, all literally allowing the passage of society from year
to year. The chroniclers described a world in which social rank was not
only a natural fact but an inviolate reflection of the will of God. They took
a dim view of popular mobilizations, including the French Revolution,
which Haydar Ahmad described as having thrown open the “doors of hell”
and allowed the “Lord of Darkness” to emerge.59 They feared the break-
down of social order and submerged the history of the commoners in a
narrative of the elites.60
Recorded history was confined to the elites. When they were mentioned
in the chronicles, commoners were represented collectively. I do not mean
simply that their individual, everyday lives were largely outside of
recorded history but that their episodic entry into politics (always framed
as an instigation of feuding elites) was a trope deployed by chroniclers to
embellish a particular plot or narrative. They were inserted and removed
from history at certain predictable moments; they rebelled and they sub-
mitted, but they were not the subject of history. What brought history
alive to the chroniclers were the elements of duplicity and surprise that
dotted the narrative of elite politics, what Pierre Bourdieu refers to as “the
room for strategies” that made known rituals unpredictable.61 When a rit-
ual (of hospitality, for example) had the possibility of going awry, when an
Ottoman governor whose displeasure had been incurred invited a notable


[PDF page 60]
42 / Knowledge and Ignorance
to share with him the boat ride to Acre, when a Shihab emir invited a dis-
affected rival to his home—these were the moments when the unpre-
dictable unfolded and when terror occurred.62
the domain of obedience
The “domain of obedience” invoked by the Ottoman government encom-
passed politics and religion, public and private—all that contributed to a
stable and tranquil social order. This metaphorical domain was grounded
in the material world of Mount Lebanon and structured around the local
inhabitants’ attachment to the land, an attachment nourished by a high
population density and a scarcity of arable land. “Elsewhere man has culti-
vated the land,” wrote David Urquhart, “in Lebanon he has made it.”63
Contrary to the letter of Ottoman law, which stipulated that all land was
the property of the Sultan, parcels of land were openly bought and sold in
Mount Lebanon.64 The established families and the Maronite Church
owned the largest tracts of land. Taking advantage of the growth of the
Christian population in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the Jan-
bulats along with several other Druze families encouraged Christian fami-
lies to migrate south to work their lands, usually on a sharecropping ba-
sis.65 They also donated land to Christians to erect churches, and by the
nineteenth century the Christian population in the southern districts of
Mount Lebanon was considerable. Although most of the land remained in
the hands of a few Druze families, in several villages and a few towns such
as Dayr al-Qamar the Christians predominated, and in them Christians
owned houses, livestock, flour mills, soap factories, silk looms, and, of
course, whatever agricultural produce they managed to grow.66 In
Kisrawan, the Maronite Khazins had established pious endowments in the
eighteenth century to consolidate their power and to protect their property
from confiscation (particularly in the absence of male heirs), a develop-
ment which had both expanded lands under cultivation and promoted per-
manent Maronite settlement. By the nineteenth century, therefore, land in
Kisrawan was controlled largely by various households of the Khazin fam-
ily— each of which further subdivided its inheritance—as well as by the
Maronite monasteries.67 For many villagers, however, the only long-term
security lay in the service of one or another of the notable families.
Caught between Ottoman imperial will, irade-i senniye, and their local
elites, the villagers of Mount Lebanon grappled with complex and compet-
ing forces and pulls that severely tested the dynamic and interlocking affil-
iations and loyalties that were grounded in material concerns—in the


[PDF page 61]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 43
mulberry tree, the olive orchard, and the silkworm. The men and women
who were born into this society—the ahali of a village— opened their
eyes to their village and for the most part lived their lives in close proxim-
ity to it. The lot of the “labouring classes,” as one consul described the ma-
jority of Mount Lebanon’s population, was to produce and to do so with
diligence.68 The villagers centered their lives around various crops and
trees. Seasons were described by the produce they brought in their wake,
and the all-important mulberry tree’s yield made the difference between
prosperity and penury. Women unwound and reeled raw silk and partici-
pated in battles. Together with the men of the village they struggled to pay
a number of taxes, the largest of which was the basic Ottoman land tax
known as the miri, which amounted to 10 percent of the produce of the cul-
tivated land.69 Depending on the region, villagers had numerous other ob-
ligations: in Kisrawan, they presented their shaykhs with a quantity of
soap, coffee, honey, or tobacco at Easter or on the occasion of the marriages
of the shaykhs’ daughters, sons, or sisters. Villagers could not marry with-
out the permission of their lord, and it would have been unheard of to have
a celebration or feast without inviting the clergy.70 Certain plots of land
that the shaykh owned were set aside and not taxed. The produce of this
land defrayed the costs of hospitality, but it was the peasants who had to
work the land collectively, usually on a Sunday after the local clergymen
had exhorted them to do God’s bidding.71
Nonpayment of taxes, default on repayments of loans, or any other se-
rious infraction brought a particularly onerous punishment. Men-at-arms
were billeted in the homes of the ahali, reminding them of the power of
Bashir Shihab and depleting them of scant resources. For a peasant to think
of taking refuge in a church or monastery was improbable; in fact, monas-
teries in many cases acted as intermediaries between creditor and debtor,
often collecting the debt itself. While the Maronite clergy could and did of-
fer sanctuary to many a refugee, those who were escaping creditors were
expressly forbidden by the Lebanese Council in 1736 to be offered refuge
under pain of excommunication.72 Even when the Maronite Church sanc-
tioned days off to celebrate a local patron saint, it issued strict warnings
that a village could take only one day off for a saint’s holiday a year, and the
rest of the saints’ holidays were to be observed with simple tokens of re-
spect. It was up to the bishops (and their subordinates) to make sure that
residents of one village did not join the celebrations of another village in
order to avoid work.73
Hospitality reproduced and reflected the social divisions of Mount
Lebanon. From the bounty of his inherited land the shaykh could afford to


[PDF page 62]
44 / Knowledge and Ignorance
entertain the guests who passed through his domain. Rituals of hospitality
were crucial to the conduct of politics, to the reputation of notables, and
hence to the maintenance of public order and obedience.74 Hospitality was
an expression of power and affluence and covered, as Urquhart astutely
noted, “a multitude of sins.”75 Foreigners, including missionaries, were
quick to appreciate this aspect of sociability in a land where beds and sil-
verware were unknown. Guests of the notables were presented with hot
embroidered silk and gold towelettes perfumed with rose water to wash
their hands and face, after which they were offered pipes, sherbet, and cof-
fee.76 Ordinary villagers, whose own simple diet consisted of bread, olives,
lentils, bulgur, and kishk (a fermented mixture of bulgur and yogurt), were
not allowed to offer coffee to their guests but had to be content with giving
it to the shaykh, who monopolized its dispensation.77
Village solidarity mediated the division between elites and nonelites.
The village square was an arena of sociability. If the village were Christian,
or even mixed, a church would often be located near or on the square; the
tolling of its bells was a collective summoning, a warning, a notice of sad-
ness or happiness. In the church also would be kept the standard of the vil-
lage, to be unfurled as was Dayr al-Qamar’s in times of war.78 And, of
course, in the square the different village hierarchies—the priest, the lord,
the cultivator, and the artisan—interacted on an everyday basis. It was a
small world, in which the surrounding villages were the outer edges of the
familiar. War and peace and life and death were village concerns. A villager
signed petitions and fought battles on behalf of the village. When called on
to furnish a contingent of men for war, the village elders decided who
would go as part of the village unit.79 Villagers also shared the “dead”
(mawat) land in the areas surrounding the village, which was uncultivated
and left for the common good.80 The poor could forage in this area, which
served as a common pasture. The springs and other natural resources were
left for all to use.
A discourse of loyalty also mediated the social order. As one chronicler
put it, “It is the custom among clansmen to distinguish followers not with
regard to sect, but with regard to allegiance and loyalty.”81 The ahali car-
ried on their humble existence expecting that their shaykh would protect
and defend them.82 The shaykh was a man who in theory put the village
first and in return he was put at the head of the village. He was a secular
patriarch; ideally, he thought and acted for the village, and he controlled,
inspired, and disciplined its young men, or shabab. In the hard times of the
locust plagues, he was expected to gather the village men and lead the ex-


[PDF page 63]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 45
pedition to repulse the invasions.83 And in good times he was expected to
preside over the community, to lead village processions, and to bear on his
shoulders the mantle of village honor. Sa‘id Janbulat, the paramount
Druze shaykh of the mid-nineteenth century, presided over daily gather-
ings of men who came to his home to eat meat, rice, stuffed vegetables,
sweets, and seasonal fruits and to pay homage. The shaykh’s power derived
from the hospitality and generosity given to his retinue, and in return he
expected service.84
ignorance and punishment
Nowhere did the hierarchy of traditional social order express itself more
graphically than in punishment. The notion of political betrayal and
treachery was contingent on a notion of secular loyalty. According to the
chronicler Haydar Ahmad, commoners “betrayed” a Shihab emir when his
extraordinary levies compelled them to revolt in 1790.85 Christians and
Druzes were punished in the same manner; commoners and notables were
not. Only Bashir Shihab authorized capital punishment for the common-
ers; only Ottoman governors authorized the outright murder of elites. No-
tables were executed by strangulation, while commoners were hanged.86
Because local custom frowned on the killing of notables by other notables,
Bashir Shihab often disposed of rivals by cutting out their tongues or, if
they were from his own family, by gouging out their eyes. Since a notable
was the face and voice of respectable society (awjuh al-bilad in Arabic; söz
sahibleri in Ottoman), mutilation, especially blinding and muting, ren-
dered a notable unfit to govern.87
One of the great sins that a notable could commit was “corrupting” (if-
sad) the social order by instigating the common folk to abandon the “do-
main of obedience”— either by inciting commoners to enter into the elite
space of politics or, conversely, by denying them their tranquillity, which
might force them into rebellion. An accusation often made by notables
against one another, in letters to Ottoman governors or to prospective al-
lies, was that their rivals were “stoking the passion” of the commoners and
“seducing” them into rebellion.88 According to the chroniclers, the willful
act was not the commoners’ disobedience, which was emotive rather than
rational, but the deliberate upsetting of the natural order by otherwise sen-
sible elites for their own political advantage.89 Hence the measures elites
took to placate the commoners were often described as being taken “to ex-
tinguish the fire of their fury.” This form of elite prose—what Ranajit


[PDF page 64]
46 / Knowledge and Ignorance
Guha famously described as the “prose of counter-insurgency”—was
haunted by the potential violation of the boundary that separated the com-
munities of knowledge and ignorance.
The violence of the Ottoman state in the Lebanese periphery may be
understood as ritualized, episodic purifications of a corrupted public order
that normally depended on an accommodation of religious difference.
When the Druze leader Bashir Janbulat rebelled against the authority of
Abdullah Pasha in 1824, he was executed on the grounds that he was a
“heretic.” His allegedly “abominable crimes” had “polluted the earth,” for
he had forsaken a compact of notability through “sedition” and had insti-
gated “disorder” and popular unrest. Thus a man who was normally up-
held as one of the söz sahibleri, or “masters of words,” was expelled from
the society of Ottoman civility, branded a “heretic rebel,” and strangled,
and his body was exhibited as an example of the absolute power of the Sul-
tan.90
Such punishment was not only a warning to other notables who strayed
from the domain of obedience but also an indication of the contingent na-
ture of public religious identity. Designations of heresy or infidelity were
assigned and revoked rather than permanently affixed. They were tactical
devices and not absolute expressions of religious hostility. For example, it
was only when Bashir Shihab sided with Mehmed Ali during Mehmed
Ali’s invasion of Syria in 1831 that Bashir was accused by Abdullah of be-
ing a “hain gavur”—a treacherous and ungrateful infidel—who was “per-
forming his gavurlikeness [gavurlug˘unu icra etmekte oldug˘una].”91 Just a
few decades earlier, when Bashir was threatened by his rivals, Abdullah’s
predecessor, the legendary Cezzar Pasha, had warned Bashir’s rivals (and
their followers) in Mount Lebanon to be “informed” that those who per-
sisted in forsaking “truth” in their opposition to Bashir risked annihila-
tion. “O ye who believe!” he wrote, quoting a verse from the Quran,
“Obey Allah, and obey the messenger and those who are in authority.”92
The buyrultu (an official Ottoman decree or mandate) continued, “Submit
and you will be saved; and if you are obstinate you will regret. . . . If you
are ahl al sunna and the community, then enter into the domain of obedi-
ence, for the hand of Allah is with the community, and if you refuse, you
will face the most malicious of conditions and misfortune.”93
Islamic metaphors were deployed in Ottoman political practice not to
impose an Islamic despotism over persecuted minorities (as Lamartine and
Orientalist historiography have insisted) but rather to reinforce an al-
legedly inviolable social hierarchy. In other words, it was mostly when the
social hierarchy was “corrupted” that markers of difference, especially re-


[PDF page 65]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 47
ligious difference, were highlighted. It was only at particular historical mo-
ments that the realities of Ottoman power—the accommodation of theory
to practice, of Islamic Ottoman discourse to a diverse and multireligious
empire—were elided momentarily to produce a necessary (at least in the
eyes of officials like Abdullah Pasha) Islamic despotism to save the empire
from the corruption of insidious heretics and infidels. But this despotism,
assumed by Lamartine to be unchanging, did not persist. Rather, it was al-
ways reconfigured as the theoretical “anomaly” that was everyday Ot-
toman politics—the perfectly routine and reciprocal, if hierarchical, inter-
course between urban Ottoman governors on the one hand and rural
Druze chieftains and Maronite emirs on the other.
Ordinary villagers who rebelled were condemned in an altogether dif-
ferent manner. Their sin, according to the community of knowledge, origi-
nated in ignorance rather than in conscious heresy. The chronicles, which
were expressions of the social order, consistently used the terms ‘umum,
‘amma, a‘wam (Ott. halk) to distinguish the “commoner” ahali from the
notable awjuh and a‘yan (Ott. söz sahibleri). Because order and Ottoman
government were necessarily “just,” anything that tended to disrupt public
order, with its built-in restrictions and hierarchies, was immediately inter-
preted as the work of mischief-makers who had stoked the passions of the
ignorant and unwise common folk. For instance, when both Muslim and
Christian villagers rebelled against Bashir Shihab’s onerous levies in 1821,
Bashir and the Druze notables hunted down the “rebels.” The chronicler
Haydar Ahmad (who was a cousin of Bashir’s) describes how the exhausted
commoners threw themselves at the feet of their master and begged for for-
giveness, “acknowledging their errors, admitting their guilt and their juhl
[ignorance] and the baseness and inferiority of their minds.”94
For his part, the Ottoman governor Abdullah Pasha was no less explicit
in framing the rebellion as a lack of perceptivity on the part of the com-
moners. His decree of 15 September 1821 was addressed to the ahali of
Kisrawan and Bilad Jbayl, to both dhimmis (Christians) and to the
Hamadiyya (the Shi‘a), who were commanded to listen:
We announce to you that we have heard that a few seditious and evil
people have removed from their heads the necklaces of obedience and
have tried to instigate the imperial subjects and to disturb their peace
and discomfort them through their intrigues, cunning and deception
which has only resulted in triviality and the stoking of our anger. And of
the things that happened is that some of you rebelled and put yourselves
at odds with the pride of the emirs, the authority of great men, our child
the venerable Bashir Shihab, may his glory increase. You claimed that


[PDF page 66]
48 / Knowledge and Ignorance
you would not pay more than one miri, and you united and [appeared to
be] turned away from evil; so our child was coming to you, bringing you
order and security and tending to your affairs, and yet you twice met
him with evil in Lahfad and on the coast of Jbayl. And despite the fact
that your rebellious and deviant actions gave you no satisfaction for you
failed, you till now remain stubborn, and till now wield the rod of rebel-
lion, a state of affairs which perplexes us. Such boldness has never before
occurred from any of the imperial subjects, for you well know that you
are weak people, unable to withstand power and battle. You also know
that there is no way for you except through mercy and compassion.
With God’s help, we are always capable of suppressing you, of driving
you away, and forcing you back into the domain of obedience after we
have disciplined those who have to be punished, for this situation cannot
be forgiven or passed over in silence by us because it is well-known that
we hold [Bashir] in our good graces, and that we have put the Mountain
and Bilad Jbayl and its districts under his control . . . and that he is au-
thorized by us to collect the miri without delay and without a piaster less
than is customarily levied. . . . How, then, did it enter your base minds to
suggest such a null and void claim? How, then, did you try to rebel?
How, then, did you assemble as if you were an army ready fo battle? You
who are easier [to crush] than the spider’s web.
We should have met your actions by giving the orders to crush you,
to suppress you, to discipline and punish you so that you would become
a lesson to those who need a lesson. But because you are our subjects, we
decided to show mercy and compassion towards you to advise you to
abandon these seditions. You should all appreciate the drastic conse-
quences of your actions which you are going to regret. All of you know
that you are the subjects held in compassion and protection, and thus
you should return to your villages and preoccupy yourselves with your
own affairs and render what is required of you. Your notables should all
go to [Bashir] and proclaim their obedience to him so that they can
95
jointly endeavor to render the miri that is required of you.
Abdullah’s incredulousness was rooted in his conviction that, ordinarily,
imperial subjects were apolitical, passive, and quiescent. The buyrultu it-
self was a prescription for normalcy. To the extent that commoners were
meant to “know” anything, they were expected to recognize that their
weakness was easier to crush than “the spider’s web” and that their salva-
tion would come only through the “mercy and compassion” of the elites.
Their insubordination was therefore a consequence of their seditious ac-
tions rather than their seditious minds. What the ahali did not know, how-
ever, was how to actively conspire, and that was why the buyrultu made a
very clear distinction between the conspiratorial and corrupting arbab al-
fasad and the ultimately pure yet gullible reaya (imperial subjects).


[PDF page 67]
Knowledge and Ignorance / 49
By this distancing process, the rebels, who clearly rose up because of ex-
cessive taxation, were rendered childlike, incapable of distinguishing good
from evil and powerless to resist temptations that the devil and the arbab
al-fasad—the instigators of corruption and sedition—placed before them.
The rebels had strayed from the patriarchal system or the domain of obe-
dience that extended from the Sultan downward to all his subjects—hence
the reference to Bashir Shihab as “our child,” who in turn was a lord over
the commoners. By rebelling, the commoners had placed themselves in the
domain of insubordination; they had exceeded their boundaries. Being
Christians and Shi‘a, they were doubly audacious (hence the double mean-
ing of the Islamic discourse regarding dhimmis as weak men who do not
fight but also as weak commoners vanquished in the field of battle) for not
only had they exceeded the temporal limits set by the Sultan, their master,
they had also violated the commandments of God. A classical Sunni Is-
lamic discourse was entirely sublimated within a nonsectarian hierarchical
discourse. The point here was not to castigate Christians or Shi‘a generally
but to denounce the boldness of the commoners whose popular movement
had threatened to break the social order and to corrupt the ordered civility
of public space.
The need for a show of force to purify the notability from the incursion
of commoners and to reaffirm the public order was a hallmark of the social
hierarchy that dominated Mount Lebanon throughout Bashir’s reign. The
reaction against popular mobilization also underscored the relations of vi-
olence that underlay a system in which the various inbuilt restraints, the
compassion of rulers, the discourse of Islamic toleration of dhimmis, the
paternalism of the shaykhs, and of course the absent presence of the Sultan
himself ultimately shored up a social order that separated knowledge from
ignorance.
time and empire
Crucial to the operation of Ottoman political culture was the notion of
nonlinear time. Every punishment implicitly carried within in it a provi-
sion for pardon; every exile was mitigated by the knowledge that return
and clemency were imminent. The Nakad name was obliterated only to be
eventually rehabilitated. The “heretic” Bashir Janbulat was executed, but
his son took his place as an “esteemed” face of society. It was recognized by
notable and commoner alike that every present situation might eventually
give way to a reclaimable past. The exact nature of this reversion depended
on circumstances, especially on the strategies deployed by those seeking


[PDF page 68]
50 / Knowledge and Ignorance
pardon and by those who had the power to grant it.96 In tandem with agri-
cultural seasons and annual pilgrimages, politics had a cyclical element.
The granting of clemency (aman) immediately returned things to what
they had been; the phrase sometimes used to describe the forgiveness of a
ruler was that he had “cleared and purified his mind.” Outcasts prostrated
themselves before authority, revitalizing hierarchy, which reciprocally
erased the memory of transgression and pollution. Time paradoxically
flowed in two directions. Sultans died, years passed, subjects rebelled but
could always return to the domain of obedience. The past was not irrevo-
cable. Like the House of Osman, which protected it, social order was as-
sumed to be eternal and unchanging in a world that recognizably
changed.97
As long as European power remained marginal, such paradoxes of Ot-
toman rule persisted. Until the age of reform, the provincial capitals con-
tinued to issue decrees that gave standard formulas for praying for the Sul-
tan’s health and were suffused with the knowledge that the House of
Osman would continue to rule “’til the end of time.”98 Sooner than any-
one could have expected, that “end of time” drew near. Seemingly invinci-
ble and immortal, the Ottoman Empire plunged itself into an era of rapid
transition and, more to the point, an era of European time and European
discourses of progress and modernization. Bashir Shihab’s metaphor about
Abu Far—the bird of prey which could not comprehend its own limits—
represented, as we shall see, local society and the Ottoman Empire as they
together confronted the possibilities of nineteenth-century change. Sectar-
ianism marked a turning point in local history. It signified a culmination of
sovereign Ottoman time and marked the construction of a new metaphor-
ical universe, a new political stage, that transformed the old regime.
