[PDF page 69]
4 The Faces of Reform
T
he old regime collapsed with the dawn of the modern age. The rebellious
Ottoman vassal and so-called founder of modern Egypt, Mehmed Ali,
launched an invasion of Syria and Mount Lebanon in 1831 led by his son
Ibrahim Pasha. His rule, which lasted until 1840, precipitated a series of
upheavals that culminated in a Druze and Maronite revolt against the
Egyptian occupation in 1840. It also led directly to the Tanzimat, the
wholesale modernization of the Ottoman army, administration, and soci-
ety along European lines, as well as to the establishment of the European
powers as permanent fixtures in the internal Ottoman political landscape.
Taking advantage of the Lebanese revolt against the Egyptians, Britain and
the Ottomans issued an ultimatum to Mehmed Ali to withdraw from Syria
in 1840. He refused, and by mid-October a joint British-Ottoman-Aus-
trian force had soundly defeated his army and restored Syria to Ottoman
sovereignty. In the wake of the restoration, the Shihab dynasty collapsed,
and sectarian clashes broke out in 1841 in Mount Lebanon between Druze
notables, who were returning from an exile imposed by the Egyptians, and
Maronite villagers of Dayr al-Qamar. The conflict was, at heart, one of op-
posing interpretations of the restoration and contradictory invocations of
rights and responsibilities in the post-Tanzimat era. This violence of 1841
ushered in the age of sectarianism.
Historians have long stressed the break with the past represented by the
Egyptian occupation and the Tanzimat. They have correctly understood
the period between 1831 and 1840 as the advent of modernization in the
Middle East in the sense that all the major participants in the Eastern
Question—Mehmed Ali, the reforming Ottomans, and the Europeans—
conceived of themselves as the embodiments of a new age. More often than
not, however, historians have glossed over the implications of this mod-
51


[PDF page 70]
52 / The Faces of Reform
ernization by depicting the changes during this era as the imposition (by
the Egyptians, the reforming Ottomans, and the Europeans) of a fully
formed and independently standing modernity on a passive and traditional
local society. They have understood sectarianism as an upswelling of pri-
mordial religious solidarities provoked by the modernizing policies of the
Egyptian occupation and by the Tanzimat.1 This perspective of reform and
reaction fails to recognize that sectarianism was a new development that
arose from the political and cultural turmoil of the period 1839 –1840 and
was not a traditional reaction to efforts at reform.2 Sectarianism was no
conflagration waiting to happen; rather it was actively produced. The cu-
mulative impact of the Egyptian invasion, the fall of the Shihabs, the in-
troduction of the Tanzimat, and the interventions of European powers con-
tributed to an environment that metaphorically and physically opened
Mount Lebanon to the possibilities of a new political order based on reli-
gious differentiation.
This chapter explores the erosion of the prereform, nonsectarian poli-
tics of notability and the development of what I call restoration politics, in
which rival local elites deployed the language of legitimacy and tradition in
an effort to outmaneuver one another following the fall of Bashir Shihab
and the reimposition of Ottoman rule in 1840. In the process and in the
context of competing interpretations of the Tanzimat, the presence of Eu-
ropean agents, and the political involvement of the Maronite Church, the
open-ended struggle unleashed over the relationship between religion and
politics inadvertently opened the domain of politics to nonelites.3
”to uplif t the name of egypt ”
Mehmed Ali’s conquest of Syria in 1831 and destruction of several Ot-
toman armies was undoubtedly an exhibition of the modern power that
had “colonized” Egypt.4 In Syria as in the Sudan, the Egyptian efforts to
conscript the population and to extract raw materials proceeded apace.5 At
the outset of his occupation, Ibrahim Pasha made gestures toward the ur-
ban Christian population. He abolished certain distinctions that had vexed
Christian pilgrims and also paid European consuls far more attention than
they ever had received under Ottoman rule. He attempted to reduce finan-
cial corruption, pacified urban Syria, and, despite his own reservations,
reaffirmed Bashir Shihab in his rule over Mount Lebanon.6 Indirect Ot-
toman rule was replaced by a far more coercive and centralized Egyptian
regime. Some of the Lebanese elites, such as the Druze Janbulats and the
Nakads, choose to remain loyal to the Ottomans and, in consequence, were


[PDF page 71]
The Faces of Reform / 53
banished following the Egyptian victories at Acre and Konya.7 Several of
the Nakad shaykhs eventually returned and submitted to Bashir; however,
Shaykh Hammud and Shaykh Nasif preferred exile.8 Bashir, for his part,
quickly bowed down before the Egyptians and assured them that Mount
Lebanon was loyal to the cause of Egypt. He urgently wrote to the notables
of the region telling them to quickly fall in line lest Ibrahim Pasha carry
out his threat to come in person to “extirpate you so that none of you shall
remain after he destroys the circle of sedition.”9 By 1833, Mount Lebanon
was pacified, and Bashir was a contented master of a gilded cage.
Ibrahim Pasha ruled Syria with a standing army and was committed to
maintaining a strict social hierarchy that owed more to Ottoman order
than has been admitted. As in the period of Ottoman rule, the absolute
submission of Syria’s inhabitants was rewarded with paternalistic concern.
But now, submission was not to a distant sultan but to a general in their
midst.10 Commands were to be obeyed without question, without consul-
tation, and without regard for the local population. “Woe to you,” warned
Ibrahim, “who disobeys me or who delays in doing my bidding.”11 The re-
forms of Ibrahim in Syria were all ultimately aimed at redirecting the trib-
ute of Syria from Istanbul to Cairo, albeit in a more ruthless and efficient
manner. Ibrahim’s regime mercilessly conscripted Druzes, Muslims, and
ultimately Christians; it despised the “children of Arabs” [evlad-ı Arab]
and treated the Syrians as if they were “the fellahin of Egypt.”12 Often, the
local notables actively cooperated with the military authorities in the se-
lection and rounding up of the ahali; the result, in the words of one report
by the authorities, was that the population was made to submit “some-
times through deception and sometimes though outright threats and in-
timidation.”13 While sanitation was improved, roads were secured, and
various factions were disciplined by the presence of a standing army, the
policies of taxation, conscription, disarmament, deforestation, and corvée
labor in mines exposed Ibrahim Pasha to revolts in Palestine, Syria, and
Mount Lebanon that began in 1834 and continued until the collapse of the
Egyptian regime in 1840.
The business of suppressing conscription revolts was nothing new to
Ibrahim’s veteran army. One of the most pervasive fears of the Egyptian
authorities was not of the Ottoman armies, which Ibrahim was convinced
he could crush, but of popular discontent and the possible unity of various
groups who could make common cause against Egyptian occupation.14 To
avoid this possibility, the occupation authorities carefully and deliberately
weighed the consequences of arming and disarming certain groups—for
example, using the Lebanese mountaineers to quell rebellions in Palestine


[PDF page 72]
54 / The Faces of Reform
and drafting Christians to fight Druzes. Ibrahim refused to interpret the
rebellions against conscription as anything but rebellions against the state
itself. One was either loyal and submitted unconditionally, or one was a
rebel; there was no middle ground. The Druze of the Hawran balked at
conscription and rebelled in the name of the Sultan in 1837 and 1838.
Some Druze shaykhs were humiliated and others captured and tortured by
the Egyptian authorities until they “confessed” to their part in promoting
“sedition.”15 An overconfident Egyptian officer corps ordered troops to
march on the insurgents. They miscalculated, however; an ill-fated en-
counter with the Druze rebels in the rocky Laja region in 1838 ended in the
rout of several Egyptian divisions.
Ibrahim Pasha was furious at the losses incurred by his army. His reac-
tion to the news of defeat and his grim determination to eradicate the
rebels were no different from the reactions of any Ottoman governor who
had ever faced a rural rebellion. Beneath all the pomp and circumstance of
his modern army, his language, descriptions, and outlook were those of a
military commander frustrated by his inability to use his superior tech-
nology to subdue what he took to be an uncivilized people. The Druzes had
dared challenge the might of the region’s most powerful regime. Alone
they were to face the consequences as Ibrahim devoted himself to planning
the extirpation of what one of his subordinates described as “a race that
cannot be trusted and have no [moral] foundations whatsoever.”16 To his
father Ibrahim admitted that the army had underestimated its task. The of-
ficers had assumed they were dealing with the “commotion of fellahin.”
Yet, “just as I ask God to [bless you], I pray that he may extend my life a
little longer because I consider myself necessary to uplift the name of
Egypt and to elevate its standing and to eradicate the example of these
rebels, which ranks as one of the most difficult problems.”17 Mehmed Ali,
however, was worried that if the Druzes were not quickly suppressed, the
Ottomans might contemplate actively intervening in Syria. He urged
Ibrahim to consider the possibility of using Maronite mountaineers
against the Druzes.18
After reinforcements arrived and with the collaboration of the Shihab
emirs and Christian villagers, Ibrahim hunted down the Druze rebels, first
in the Hasbayya region and then in the Laja. Ibrahim sent the following or-
ders to his officers:
You must do all that is necessary, trust in God, and march on the rebels
to make an example of them and to exterminate them. If the rebels take
refuge in the villages, you must open fire with the artillery until you


[PDF page 73]
The Faces of Reform / 55
have no [ammunition] left; if you [see that] the task has not been ac-
complished, then march on them with the soldiers; do not slacken in
your efforts to put down the rebellion and to punish the rebels; kill men
and women; overlook whatever the soldiers do in this cause, and destroy
19
[the rebels] as thoroughly as possible. In short, do what must be done.
A few days later word was received from the “victorious” army that the
“orders to execute the traitorous rebels” had been carried out. Faceless and
nameless, the “heretics” had been subdued in Hasbayya. Only the Laja
problem remained, and that too was soon resolved. Ibrahim Pasha in-
formed Bashir that “the sword is more trustworthy and prophetic than
books.”20 The rebellion had finally been put down. The leaders of the
rebels threw themselves before the mercy Ibrahim Pasha, begging for
aman. With the “heretics” at his feet, Ibrahim decided to accept the total
submission of the Druzes, while his loyal Shihab allies resolutely looked
on.21
to abolish the past
The Egyptian policy of arming Christian villagers and sending them to
suppress the Druzes has been interpreted by most historians as a turning
point in Druze-Maronite relationships.22 Certainly the policies of divide
and rule determinedly pursued by Ibrahim Pasha were a factor in the later
development of Druze-Maronite antagonism. But several qualifications
are in order. Ibrahim Pasha did not seek to disrupt the social order, nor did
the Christians fight the Druzes out of religious zeal. The significance of
distributing weapons to the Christians lies elsewhere, for in their arming
and disarming Ibrahim Pasha revealed his fundamental commitment to a
traditional Ottoman social order.
The Druze insurrection against Ibrahim was justified primarily in
terms of loyalty to the Sultan. According to French consular reports, the
Druze rebels did not harm Christian villagers in any way, leaving them
free to either join the rebellion or remain neutral.23 Nevertheless, because
of the Hawran rebellion, Bashir Shihab fired the Druzes working as his
servants and guards at Bayt al-Din.24 Bashir also threatened to destroy any
Druze village in Mount Lebanon which joined or supported the rebellion.25
The dominant concern on both sides of the rebellion was loyalty and a
safeguarding of the social order. Christian villagers sent to fight the Druze
rebels were selected on the basis of their loyalty and reputation for brav-
ery. In a letter to the Maronite Patriarch, Bashir Shihab’s son, Amin, un-
derscored the necessity of “obedience” to Ibrahim Pasha and asked the Pa-


[PDF page 74]
56 / The Faces of Reform
triarch to help select three hundred young men from the Jubbat Bsharri,
whose ahali “were famed for their bravery” and were “reputed” to be
more “capable” than the other ahali of Jbayl.26
The religious affiliation of the inhabitants was inscribed within a dis-
course of loyalty. Christians of certain districts were mobilized because
they were not rebellious like the Druzes. Although Ibrahim used a Sunni
discourse to classify the Druze as heretics, he did not describe the Chris-
tians as infidels. It was their loyalty that informed their Christianity just
as it was the Druzes’ rebellion that brought about their heresy. Ibrahim
used Christians as translators in his interrogations of Druze prisoners, and
he supplied the Christians with weapons. They were given sixteen thou-
sand rifles to fight “the traitorous infidel Druze sect which denies the ex-
istence of God and his prophets. God willing, they and their property will
become plunder for you, and you are to keep the weapons for eternity.”27
More than at any previous time, the Druze elites found themselves iso-
lated. Already weakened by a sustained policy of Bashir (that predated the
Egyptian invasion) to consolidate power at the expense of traditionally
strong notable families, the Janbulats were further diminished and one of
the ‘Imad shaykhs was killed in the course of the uprising. Nevertheless,
the surviving rebels were granted aman. Ibrahim Pasha wrote to Bashir
Shihab, “Emir. As regards the Druzes of Jabal al-Shuf, let bygones be by-
gones. Do not harm them when they return to their homes. Allay their
fears and set their minds at rest.”28 Past crimes, for which more than a
thousand rebels had been cast into the “fires of hell,” were forgotten ac-
cording to the principle of letting bygones be bygones.
Discursively, history was turned back. The rehabilitated Druze shaykhs
returned to reclaim their land and titles. Their heresy had been in their re-
bellion. In other words, as far as Ibrahim was concerned, the Druzes were
“heretics” only when in the act of transgression. To submit was to lift the
stigma and become loyal subjects like any other. In short, the Christians
were mobilized by the authorities to divide and rule within the normal
elite Ottoman channels of careful control and dispensation. For Ibrahim
Pasha, the mobilization was a ruthless and utterly calculated move, but it
was also a temporary measure. In other words, the Christian identity of
the Lebanese came to the fore only as a method for the authorities to sep-
arate them from the Druzes, to arm them, and to send them against the
Druzes. Once the rebellion was over and the threat of disorder contained,
the Christian-Druze dichotomy was meant to be erased; all subjects were
to resume their former social standing. Hence the decision to abolish the
memory of past deeds and transgressions. The Druze rebels and Christian


[PDF page 75]
The Faces of Reform / 57
loyalists were commanded to return to being equally tranquil and obedient
villagers and subjects. To fulfill this reinscription of the Ottoman social or-
der, Ibrahim quickly ordered the disarming of the Christians. Nothing less
than total reassertion of the social status quo ante was acceptable.
In 1839, however, Sultan Abdülmecid, who found himself under
tremendous military pressure from Ibrahim Pasha and who was quite lit-
erally at the mercy of European diplomacy, promulgated the Gülhane de-
cree. The Tanzimat was officially inaugurated. The 1839 decree stipulated
the equality of Muslim and non-Muslim subjects before the law and in-
sisted that this equality was fully compatible with the empire’s glorious Is-
lamic past. However, even as Ottoman officials described obviously new
laws and rights as arising out of (as opposed to contradicting) an Islamic
Ottoman tradition, European powers viewed the Tanzimat as a mandate
for intervention on behalf of the empire’s non-Muslim subjects—and
what better place to begin than in what they perceived to be the belea-
guered tribal refuge of Mount Lebanon. As a result, Mount Lebanon be-
came a battlefield to determine the future of the Ottoman Empire. On its
terrain, Europeans, Ottomans, and locals were locked in a war over the
meaning and direction of the Tanzimat, which itself contained several
overlapping discourses of religious equality, Islamic tradition, political le-
gitimacy, past glory, and present sovereignty, all framed implicitly by a Eu-
rope-dominated modernity. The upshot was that Britain decided, based on
various interests of its own, to put an end to Mehmed Ali’s imperial ambi-
tions. In 1840 it led a campaign which ousted the Egyptians from Syria and
Mount Lebanon, restoring those areas to Ottoman rule. The rest of this
chapter examines the emergence of a local politics of restoration in the
shadow of the Tanzimat.
restoration politics
In 1840, Ibrahim Pasha faced yet another revolt against his onerous con-
scription policy. This time the revolt united Druzes and Christians and
succeeded because of timely Ottoman and European intervention. The re-
volt against Bashir Shihab and his Egyptian master, as well as their own at-
tempts to suppress it, were formulated as a return to legitimacy. Initially,
it seemed that the rebellion would be quickly snuffed out by Ibrahim
Pasha’s army. The Egyptian authorities were confident that they would
easily erase all traces of the rebellion “as if it never was.”29 Order was once
more equated with knowledge, rebellion with ignorance. Bashir accused
the rebels of having succumbed to the devilish “temptation” (waswasa)


[PDF page 76]
58 / The Faces of Reform
that filled their “ignorant” minds. Ibrahim was convinced that the revolt
was caused by fears planted by “some contemptible [men] lacking their
wits,” which had played havoc with the “deficient understanding” of the
local population. Like Abdullah Pasha, Ibrahim promised the insurgents
amnesty if they immediately reentered the domain of obedience. However,
also like Abdullah, he warned them that if their actions stemmed from
their “own volition”—in other words, if they chose to persist in their re-
bellion and ignore the window of opportunity that the discourse of igno-
rance opened for a peaceful surrender—then he would move to “annihi-
late” their “betrayal.”30
Although the rebellion was spontaneous and fragmented, lacking a sin-
gle leader and center, Druze and Christian rebels were united by their
common fear and hatred of foreign troops and oppressive duties, and, more
specifically, by their fear of conscription and disarmament. The common-
ers’ mobilization was characterized by a unity of purpose that was reflected
in a proclamation issued on 8 June 1840 at a church in Antilyas by Chris-
tian, Druze, Sunni, and Shi‘a villagers from Mount Lebanon; there, the
rebels declared themselves of “one mind and one voice.”31 Druze rebels
swore at the altar of a Christian saint and invoked his wrath on them if
they failed in their loyalty toward the other rebels. Religion was important
as a source of encouragement in these difficult times despite Bashir Shi-
hab’s promises to his Egyptian masters that his efforts “to divide Druze and
Christian will soon bear fruit.”32 After some hesitation and despite fear of
the apparently leaderless nature of the uprising, the Maronite Patriarch fi-
nally urged the priests and monks in Mount Lebanon to aid in al-qiyam al-
jumhuri, or the popular uprising of all sects. He insisted that al-salih al-
jumhuri, or the popular welfare, could be served only if Egypt’s oppressive
reign ended.33
The Maronite Patriarch’s intervention in the realm of politics was as un-
usual as that of commoners such as Abu-Samra Ghanim and Ahmad
Daghir, who took the lead in skirmishes with Ibrahim’s troops.34 Both the
Church and the ahali justified their invasion of political space as a tempo-
rary incursion caused by the unbearable “tyranny” that had befallen “the
people of this country.”35 Soon enough, however, several disaffected
shaykhs swelled the ranks of the rebels, including a Khazin shaykh from
Ghusta who proclaimed himself to be the military commander of the re-
bellion. These elites sought to provide the commoners’ rebellion with a
“respectable” face. They regarded the uprising as a means to restore the
Ottoman regime and maintain the privileges that they claimed had been
usurped by Bashir Shihab and the Egyptians. They assumed, for example,


[PDF page 77]
The Faces of Reform / 59
that the Sultan’s decrees promoting good administration in no way super-
seded their privileges of old. Like the commoners and the Maronite
Church, they fought against “tyranny” and in the hope “that things
should revert to the way they had been.”36 For the rebel elites liberty, Gül-
hane, and tradition amounted to one and the same thing: a full restoration
of their traditional social position and a revived notable politics. Accord-
ingly, and on behalf of the Shi‘a, Druze, and Christian communities, Yusuf
Shihab, Faris Hubaysh, Haydar Qa’idbey, and Francis Khazin jointly ap-
pealed to France in the name of liberty, Britain in the name of humanity,
and the Ottoman Empire in the name of legitimacy. They begged the Sul-
tan to once again grace them with his benevolent justice; they urged the
French to involve themselves in the quest for “liberty” (but not, signifi-
cantly, equality) and the restoration of their “original and legitimate
ruler”; and they pleaded with the British to intercede on their behalf so
that they could soon enjoy the benefaction of the Gülhane decree.37
None of the rebels gave much thought to the contradictory memories of
the past that were bound to come into play if and when the Egyptian occu-
pation ended. Nor did they ponder the incongruity of a discourse of
restoration in an Ottoman Empire that was itself undergoing profound
change in the age of the Tanzimat. The British and Ottoman governments
contributed to this ambiguity, for the British proposed and the Ottoman
government approved of sending secret agents such as Richard Wood to
encourage the notables in their revolt. Wood promised a full restoration of
past “privileges” to several key families. He declared that he worked for a
return of the “legitimate” Ottoman sovereign and guaranteed “the inhab-
itants of Lebanon the enjoyment of their ancient franchises.”38 Jesuit
priests such as Père Ryllo and French aristocratic figures seeking to expe-
rience some Eastern romance joined the effort, each promising and believ-
ing that they held the destiny of Mount Lebanon in their hands. At this
critical stage, therefore, it was not Ottomans who arrived at the shores of
Mount Lebanon to rally the rebels but Europeans who acted on behalf of
the Ottomans and who supplied the ships and material for a restoration of
Syria to its “lawful” sovereign.39 Europe, particularly Great Britain, repre-
sented the reforming Ottoman Empire in its own periphery.40
translating the tanzimat
In the aftermath of the restoration of the Sultan’s rule to Syria, Ottoman
officials were stymied by the ambiguity inherent in the Ottoman project of
reform. Precisely because the Tanzimat was not a coherent package of re-


[PDF page 78]
60 / The Faces of Reform
forms, it was elaborated as much in its application as in its textual formu-
lation. Precisely (and perhaps most crucially) because British power read
Mount Lebanon in religious tribal terms, what to the Ottomans was a sec-
ular project of imperial renewal was expressed in Mount Lebanon from the
outset as a sectarian project of local restoration. Restoration politics and
the vacuum created by Bashir’s downfall created the space for reworked
communal identities to emerge in the public sphere. Druze and Maronite
leaders were responsive to the presence of many powers, each of which
sought out leaders to act as interlocutors for the religious communities of
Mount Lebanon. Therefore, although the Druze Nakad shaykhs had his-
torically controlled only a few particular districts in the Shuf region, they
appealed to the British—themselves already predisposed to divide the na-
tives into religious “tribes” or “races”— on behalf of all the Druzes. Simi-
larly, the Maronite Church spoke on behalf of the entire Maronite ta’ifa.41
In the face of these claims, Ottoman reformers were at a loss to distin-
guish between “legitimacy” as understood by Druze Nakad notables and
“liberty” as embraced by their Christian tenants.42 The Tanzimat embod-
ied both principles in the person of the Sultan, who as a legitimate ruler
decreed the religious equality of all his subjects. But what about regions
like Mount Lebanon where the Sultan was absent and where liberty and
legitimacy were open to fundamentally incompatible interpretations? Ot-
toman reformers obviously did not take into account the demographic
character of Mount Lebanon. How was equality of treatment of religious
communities going to be reconciled with demographic majorities and mi-
norities, especially after the Maronite Patriarch declared the Maronites to
be the “majority” of the population?43 How were “local customs” (which
the Ottoman government pledged to uphold in Mount Lebanon) to be ac-
commodated within the “new laws” of the Tanzimat?44 How exactly was
Selim Pasha, thrust into Mount Lebanon to restore Ottoman sovereignty,
to accomplish his task when it was European ships that had allowed him to
invade, European weapons that had enabled him to fight, and European
munitions that had permitted him to reaffirm (if not buy) the loyalty of
the rebels in the first place?
These unanswered questions gnawed at the coherence of Ottoman
restoration. The transfer of the Ottoman governor’s seat from Acre to
Beirut and the investiture of Bashir Shihab’s second cousin with power in
place of the old emir in 1840 did little to resolve the confusion of restora-
tion politics. The decree confirming Bashir Qasim as emir of Mount
Lebanon was addressed to the “Pride, the Glory and the Notability, the
Shaykhs of the Druze tribes.” Bashir Qasim was appointed as the lawful


[PDF page 79]
The Faces of Reform / 61
ruler of the “Mountain of the Druzes,” a term that reflected the power and
demographic balance of the old regime, when Druze families dominated
the social order.45 The realities of the European-aided restoration of Ot-
toman rule as well as the interregnum of Egyptian occupation for nearly
ten years, however, rendered even the term “Mountain of the Druzes,” or
Cebel-i Düruz, an anachronism that would be replaced by 1845, in Ot-
toman usage at least, by the term “Mount Lebanon,” or Cebel-i Lübnan.46
Bashir Qasim ruled more than just “Druze tribes,” and Cebel-i Düruz en-
compassed regions which fell under the influence of an increasingly active
Maronite Church.
Ottoman sovereignty of the kind stressed in the Gülhane decree re-
mained a fiction, and the local elites knew it. To that end, they sought to re-
align themselves, however ambivalently, behind one or another of the
Great Powers while they reaffirmed their “unwavering” loyalty to the
Sublime Porte. European states needed local communities to justify their
involvement in the Ottoman Empire. France under François Guizot
worked hard to reestablish communications with the Maronite Church,
while Britain sought to “obtain for [the Druzes] the best security that
hereafter they shall not be disturbed in the free enjoyment of their own in-
stitutions & liberty, & security for their persons and property.”47 In an ef-
fort to regain their sequestered proprieties, Druze notables at once invoked
the rights of restoration before Ottoman officials and promised British
representatives that they were capable of “delivering up their Country to
the protection of Great Britain.”48 In turn, the Maronite Church cultivated
its relationship with both Catholic nations and the Sublime Porte.49
The point of contact and collaboration between the Great Powers and
the local elites was communal; the problem lay in the definition of the
community—its boundaries, its structure, and its history. In a bid to re-
duce tensions that his own reckless promises helped create, Wood sug-
gested a sectarian administration for Mount Lebanon in the early months
of 1841. He proposed that a religiously mixed council be created under
Bashir Qasim that would include three members “elected” by the Maro-
nite, Orthodox, and Greek Catholic patriarchs respectively. To these would
be added, among others, one Druze, one Sunni, and one Shi‘a to strike a
communal balance.50 Wood’s proposal satisfied neither the Druzes nor the
Maronite Church, which had stepped forward during the restoration to
represent the Maronite “clergy and people.”51 As outlined in a list of de-
mands submitted to the Austrians in 1840, the Maronite Church explicitly
stated that it was distinct from all other sects and desired to be treated
“without being mixed with any other sect.” Its sense of community was


[PDF page 80]
62 / The Faces of Reform
not territorially bounded, for it demanded protection for all Maronites
“wherever they may be found.”52 In addition, its request for “favors” from
the Sultan for the “Maronite Patriarch, his Bishops, his Maronite clergy
and people” indicated not only a hierarchical sense of who constituted the
Maronite sect but a fairly clear demarcation between the people (al-sha‘b)
and the clergy.53 Most of the appeal focused on the ecclesiastical world, but
the twelfth demand explicitly broached the topic of secular politics. It
stated that the “ruler of Mount Lebanon and the Anti-Lebanon according
to old convention (al-mu‘tad al-qadim) will only be a Maronite from the
noble Shihab family, as the majority of the population of the aforemen-
tioned Mountains are Maronites, and that the Ruler be appointed without
the involvement of the Sublime Porte.” In te thirteenth point the Patriarch
asked that there be only one taxation annually— one miri and one jizya (a
poll tax collected from non-Muslims)— and that all other taxes not “sanc-
tioned of old” be abolished.
The Maronite Church’s explicit involvement in politics was the clearest
indication of a break with traditional order. Its claim that tradition legit-
imized the appointment of a Maronite ruler over Mount Lebanon was im-
mediately rejected by Druze notables. The fluid political situation of 1840
allowed the indigenous elites to make new political claims that invoked
mythologized sectarian pasts.54 Their petitions and letters that spoke of an
historically Christian or Druze Mount Lebanon revealed an incipient cul-
ture of sectarianism in its moment of production. The conflicting appeals
of the elites reflected a developing sectarian consciousness that was torn
between old and new and oriented both to Europe and to the Ottoman Em-
pire. The demands submitted by the Patriarch were indicative of these cur-
rents. The Maronites, according to the Patriarch, were indeed a ta’ifa, or
sect, seeking Austrian protection, but the meaning of that ta’ifa was still
predominantly ecclesiastical. Although the Church claimed to speak on be-
half of all Maronites, its notion of the community remained firmly within
old regime understandings and social boundaries. At the top of the hierar-
chy sat the Patriarch, himself from one of the great families of Mount
Lebanon, and then came the bishops, among whom were members of the
Karam and Khazin families. Following the bishops came the clergy and fi-
nally the people. All that was new in the petition was the claim of a tradi-
tion that sanctioned a Maronite ruler over Mount Lebanon.55


[PDF page 81]
The Faces of Reform / 63
the violence of 1841
The most obvious sign, indeed the culmination, of the transition from tra-
ditional notable politics to restoration politics was the revolt by Druze no-
tables against Bashir Qasim and the Christian ahali of Dayr al-Qamar in
1841.56 A struggle over land and control of taxation underpinned and gave
the impetus for intercommunal tensions, which led to the first major sec-
tarian clashes between Maronite and Druze in Mount Lebanon.57 As it
happened, the Druze Nakads and the Janbulats returned from exile in
Egypt to reclaim their former properties. Although Bashir Qasim restored
all the former properties to their “legitimate” owners, he did not restore
Dayr al-Qamar to its Nakad shaykhs, and he handed over control of several
other villages to his relatives. The Druze notables, taking up the slogan of
restoration and believing what had been promised them by both the Ot-
tomans and the British, demanded a full restitution of their rights.58 The
Maronite villagers of Dayr al-Qamar disputed the right of certain shaykhs
to their properties.59 They demanded rights of protection and equality that
they thought were guaranteed to them by the Gülhane proclamation and
the promises of Wood. Although they were suspicious of Bashir Qasim,
whom they accused of having led the Druze shaykhs against them, “plun-
dering our properties, money and animals,” they were unwilling to return
to vassalage under their former Druze lords.60 The Druze Nakads, there-
fore, understood the Tanzimat as restoration. The Maronite villagers saw it
as a rupture with Druze control, and they were backed in their interpreta-
tion by the Maronite Church, which, in turn, called for the reestablishment
of a “traditional” Maronite emirate. It took only a spark to set off war.
The violence that occurred in Dayr al-Qamar in 1841 is worth recount-
ing because it sheds light on some of the new features that characterized
restoration politics. The chronicler Mishaqa wrote:
A Christian from Dayr al-Qamar was hunting with his gun on B‘aqlin
land, and a Druze from there objected. Bad blood surfaced between
them, and helpers came to both sides, the fray ending with the discharge
of weapons. The cry reached Dayr al-Qamar that the people of B‘aqlin
had killed their men, so the Nakad shaykhs got on their horses and rode
to the place to quell the disturbance, and the men of Dayr al-Qamar too
came armed and running. When they arrived they found the men of
B‘aqlin gathered together and some men were slain. Shots were fired
and a fierce battle was fought until the B‘aqlin men were driven back
61
with all those who had come to help them.
From Mishaqa’s own testimony, the incident began in “B‘aqlin land”


[PDF page 82]
64 / The Faces of Reform
over a seemingly trivial issue and then escalated to the point of pitched
battles that raged between the two villages. over two dozen Druzes were
slain. The shaykhs and the Maronite Patriarch tried to stop the fighting
and indeed, for a short while, a truce was called.62 However, on learning
that Bashir Qasim was on his way to the Shuf to organize the tax collec-
tion, several Nakad shaykhs and other Druzes from the Shuf laid siege to
Dayr al-Qamar, trapping Bashir Qasim inside. After a three-week siege,
the Druzes finally succeeded in ambushing the emir. They beat him
senseless and stripped him of his clothing. Moreover, the Nakads slew
Christians who had served them for years and had even traveled with
them in their exile. The fact that the Druze shaykhs had killed those who
had served them violated the traditions of both hospitality and loyalty
that had underpinned the old regime. That the Druze had brought in out-
siders from neighboring villages increased the sense of unease. Quite
simply, in the eyes of the Dayr al-Qamar ahali, the shaykhs had betrayed
tradition; they had killed after giving aman. The shaykhs for their part
were incensed at the alleged disloyalty and haughtiness exhibited by the
ahali, which had resulted in conflict and the death of several Druze
shaykhs.63
Several layers of conflict were involved in the sectarian clashes at Dayr
al-Qamar. On one level, an elite struggle between the Druze notables and
Bashir Qasim for control of land and taxation was expressed as a Druze-
Maronite confrontation. On another level, a social crisis was represented
by the refusal of Maronite commoners of Dayr al-Qamar to accept Druze
notable hegemony as well as by the insistence of Druze notables on im-
posing their “legitimate” rights on Christian subjects amid a breakdown of
the old regime symbiosis that had bound Druze elites to the Maronite
Church. On a third level, a marked redefinition of the relationship be-
tween religion and politics had profound implications for a multireligious
society. The old regime had been dependent on a notion of a quietist reli-
gion and passive subjecthood that had underpinned and yet was separate
from a nonsectarian notable politics. Restoration politics, however, had
singled out the religious identity of the local inhabitants as the point of de-
parture for a modern reformed and ambivalent Ottoman sovereignty in
Mount Lebanon. Although material factors related to taxation and control
of land underlay the violence of 1841, the Christian villagers of Dayr al-
Qamar rejected the control of the Nakads because they were Druze nota-
bles. In this new development the social, the political, and the religious
were explicitly and, following the bloodshed at Dayr al-Qamar, antagonis-


[PDF page 83]
The Faces of Reform / 65
tically fused together. A far-reaching crisis of coexistence emerged. Imme-
diately, the fighting spread to other regions of the Shuf. Hundreds of vil-
lagers, both Druze and Christian, were slain. A feeling of uncertainty pre-
vailed. What had begun as a local conflict in B‘aqlin degenerated into open
conflict across the Shuf. The smallest of incidents threatened to explode
into open warfare. The triviality of the hunting incident captured the ter-
rifying reality embodied in communal politics. Conflict could happen any-
where and anytime. The uneasiness was further exacebated because com-
munal boundaries were shifting; religion was detached from its social
environment and treated it as a cohesive, exclusivist, and organic force;
neighbors suddenly became potential enemies. Yet just as unsettling was
the fact that coreligionists often refused to aid one another during sectar-
ian clashes. Few Christians from outside the Shuf bothered with the Chris-
tians of the Shuf, just as the Druzes of the Matn refrained from siding with
the Druzes of the Shuf. Following the logic of sectarian discourse, those
who did not help their coreligionists were labeled “traitors.”64
It is important, however, to place these developments in perspective.
Precisely because sectarianism was not an explosion of latent or endemic
religious animosities, because it was not a primordial resurgence, there was
still room for the elites to maneuver, and there was time to define the con-
tours of an emerging sectarian landscape. The Maronite Church did not
sever contact with the Druze elites. Following the outbreak of hostilities, it
called for tranquillity and order across Mount Lebanon. Maronite villagers
continued to live under Druze shaykhs, and families such as the Janbulats
still employed Christian teachers and advisors.65 Even before the Dayr al-
Qamar incident, the Druze notables had tried to put an end to this devel-
opment of sectarianism by evoking memories of old-regime elite solidar-
ity. They had urged the Christian shaykhs to unite with them in obedience
to the Sultan and in their love for and sincere relationships with each
other. They had even pleaded that the notables of each ta’ifa should work
for their common interest, noting that the rank and station of each should
be preserved according to tradition and right and that disputes should be
settled peacefully in accordance with customary law.66 To the extent that
the Maronite Church and the secular Christian notables never for a mo-
ment contemplated opening the realm of politics to the ahali, they were in
sympathy with the Druze proposal. Yet while old-regime traditions of elite
compromise were based on common values and a stable social order that
regulated the distribution of wealth among notable families, restoration
politics altered the ground rules and marked the beginning of an open-


[PDF page 84]
66 / The Faces of Reform
ended struggle for a definition of the community and control of land in
which the söz sahibleri were no longer the masters of words.
Reform arrived in Mount Lebanon in a complex of guises. There was the
specific text of the Gülhane decree—and many interpretations of it. There
were the many solemn promises made by Ottoman and British officials to
local notables. And there were overlapping discourses of reform, legiti-
macy, liberty, and security. In contrast to the old regime, where the trans-
gression of social order invited a defined, ritualized retribution, the
restoration marked the autonomous entrance of the ahali into, and hence
the unsettling of, politics. Simultaneously, however, the elites embarked
on a frantic search for a political solution to close the door on such subal-
tern mobilization. They drew heavily on old-regime metaphors and under-
standings even as their competing claims steadily narrowed the areas for
compromise. The rest of this study will therefore dwell on key moments of
the collapse and reconstitution of the social order, up to and including
1860. Following 1841, restoration politics gave way to a new form of sec-
tarian politics that was focused on redefining Mount Lebanon geographi-
cally, politically, and culturally.
