[PDF page 85]
5 Reinventing Mount Lebanon
T
he violence of 1841, which initially pitted the Christian villagers of Dayr
al-Qamar against their returning Druze shaykhs, unleashed an open-
ended struggle among elites over the meaning of tradition. Chroniclers
and clergymen, notables and Ottoman officials, and, with overbearing con-
fidence, foreign missionaries and European consuls—all those who inter-
vened in and shaped recorded history— debated how best to bring tran-
quillity to Mount Lebanon. In the spirit of the Tanzimat and in accordance
with the principles of restoration, they agreed on one thing: that order in
Mount Lebanon would not infringe on its “ancient custom.” The problem
lay in defining this custom and agreeing on what constituted tradition.
Even before Bashir Shihab’s death in exile in 1850, the meaning and mem-
ory of his long and complex reign had become completely ensnared in a
struggle for succession that owed more to an invention of tradition than to
tradition itself.1 As strongly as the Maronite Church favored the restora-
tion of a putatively Christian emirate, the Druze notables who had borne
the brunt of Bashir’s ambition vehemently opposed it. The hapless Bashir
Qasim pleaded his own cause. At its simplest, the issue that divided the
elites was land. Who was to control it? to rule it? to administer it? At its
most complex, the issue was reconceptualizing this land and the communi-
ties that inhabited it. In the process, and in the shadow of a European-
Ottoman concern for progress, Mount Lebanon was geographically recon-
figured and communally reinvented.
Various elite efforts following the violence of 1841 to reinscribe strict
political and social boundaries reached their climax in December 1842 with
a joint European-Ottoman decision to partition Mount Lebanon along re-
ligious lines. In 1845, the Ottoman foreign minister, S¸ ekib Efendi, further
reorganized Mount Lebanon’s administration along communal lines. This
67


[PDF page 86]
68 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
chapter explores how the elites began to politically reconstitute themselves
in allegedly traditional sectarian terms while the very basis of tradition—
absolute Ottoman sovereignty which existed “for all time”—was being
undermined at every turn. I contend that an informal subjecthood to Eu-
ropean powers developed alongside formal subjecthood to a changing Ot-
toman state. Although the Sultan remained sovereign over Mount
Lebanon, the presence of Jesuit and American Protestant missionaries and
of agents such as Richard Wood tacitly widened the domain of obedience to
include France and Great Britain. Unlike their relationship with their Sul-
tan, which was marked by an allegiance supposedly impervious to the pas-
sage of historical time, local elites nurtured an informal alliance with for-
eign powers very much defined by historical evolutionary time. Not only
was the interaction between the Maronite elites and France, to give an ex-
ample, validated by specific historical documents or treaties, such as Louis
XIV’s letter of protection to the Maronites in 1649 and the Treaty of Paris
of 1856, but it was increasingly articulated through a discourse of progress
and civilization. Neither Maronite nor Druze leaders sought to break with
the Ottoman Empire, but each recognized individual European powers as
the protectors of their community and as arbitrators of their political des-
tiny, as players who could influence the course of politics as much as and,
in some cases, more than the Sultan himself.
Mount Lebanon was communally reinvented in the sense that a public
and political sectarian identity replaced a nonsectarian politics of notability
that had been the hallmark of prereform society. This shift was not nearly
as simple or as complete as many observers have assumed. Historians have
elucidated many factors that aggravated the situation, including the Egyp-
tian invasion, the Eastern Question politics, and the rise of the Maronite
Church, but they have all assumed that these historical causes cleared the
way for the reemergence of a coherent, primordial religious identity. They
have not examined the anxiety inherent in this new elite sectarian project;
nor have they sufficiently noted its obvious contradictions, its tentative-
ness, and its underlying fragility.
In large part, historians have missed these factors because the sources
they have relied on have taken communal identity for granted. The volu-
minous European consular correspondence on the sectarian strife, which
forms the backbone of most modern historical narratives of this period, is
a plethora of invaluable reports, dispatches, letters, and memoranda. His-
torians have sifted through these and have disinterred the complex politics
behind the correspondence, and they have elucidated why and how the
powers acted in the way they did; they have cross-checked sources to pro-


[PDF page 87]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 69
duce consistent and balanced narratives, stripping away the conceit of each
European power to represent all local history. But they have left undis-
turbed, indeed they have reproduced, the single greatest fallacy of such
historiography: the notion of the pure communal actor.
narrating violence
The most preponderant treatises on sectarian violence were those produced
by the European powers. In 1842, Lord Howden of the House of Lords, de-
manded to know what the British government planned to do about the sit-
uation of “anarchy” that had rendered movement in Syria as difficult as
traveling “in the interior of Africa.”2 The only answer Lord Aberdeen
could provide with any assuredness was that Britain would redouble its ur-
gent remonstrations about the pace of Ottoman reform.3 From the outset,
British observers resorted to an Orientalist knowledge to comprehend the
events that unfolded in Mount Lebanon. “Disputes about the possession of
land and trivial matters,” wrote consul Hugh Rose, “were the causes of
quarrel between the two sects, whose mutual animosity is proverbial.”4
Lord Aberdeen elaborated on these sentiments in a dispatch to Stratford
Canning, the British ambassador in Istanbul:
The enmity between the Druses and the Maronites of Mount Lebanon is
of ancient date. A difference of religious belief, added to a struggle for
political supremacy between two parties, the numerical superiority of
one being more than counterbalanced by the warlike qualities of the
other, has continually produced contests between them. Of late years the
oppressive rule of Mehemet [Mehmed] Ali, acting nearly equally upon
both, maintained peace between the rival parties; but their jealousies and
animosities revived on the departure of the Egyptians, and have brought
5
about the warfare which has desolated the Lebanon.
Although they cast the fanatical antimodern “Turk” as a figure who in his
shadowy manifestations cunningly and secretly desired to upset the path
of reform and to harm Christians, British diplomats conceived of the sec-
tarian “tribes” of Mount Lebanon as unmodern. In their eyes, Druzes and
Maronites did not fight a rational war; they reenacted an ancestral conflict.
By underscoring the “proverbial” mutual animosity of Muslim and
Christian, consul Rose, who had arrived in Syria as part of the Allied
forces in 1840 and whose knowledge of local history was sketchy to say the
least, instinctively drew on another of the basic European assumptions
concerning the Ottoman Empire: the inherent Islamic hostility toward


[PDF page 88]
Map 4. The Druze District of Lebanon. (Reproduced with permission
from The Missionary Herald: Reports from Ottoman Syria, 1819 –1870,
ed. Kamal Salibi and Yusuf K. Khoury. Amman, Jordan: Royal Institute
for Interfaith Studies, 1995; originally appeared in The Annual Reports of
ABCFM, vol. 35, 1844)


[PDF page 89]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 71
Christianity. Rose insisted that the Druzes were pawns of a lurking Ot-
toman Muslim fanaticism that desired to destroy Christianity in the East.
As Canning told Aberdeen, “Mr. Moore and Mr. Wood agree with Colonel
Rose and the other Consuls at Beyrout in describing the revived fanaticism
of the Turks, their mistrust and increasing hatred of everything Christian
and their secret preparations for defence against Foreign aggression.”6
British and French attitudes toward the local violence marginalized the
spontaneity of the violence and minimized the agency of its perpetrators.
European consuls invariably blamed the violence on alleged Ottoman neg-
ligence, or, more frequently, they referred to an insidious Ottoman plot to
provoke Druzes and Maronites into a war in a bid to reassert direct rule in
Mount Lebanon.7 Their emphasis on supposed Turkish machinations gave
structure to the chaotic events that transpired on the ground.8
France had a far less ambivalent attitude than Britain, which was torn
between sympathy for the Druzes as a counterweight to French influence
on the Maronites and concern for the rights of Christians. The French gov-
ernment was busy trying to mend bridges with the Maronites following
the debacle of French support for Mehmed Ali in 1840.9 For their part, the
Jesuits, who had enjoyed amicable relations with the Egyptian authorities,
shuddered at the prospect of restored Ottoman rule. Following Druze at-
tacks on Jesuit outposts in the Bekaa in 1841, Benoît Planchet, the Jesuit
missionary who had arrived in the early 1830s, wrote that the true “goal”
of the Druzes was to drive the Christians out of Mount Lebanon entirely.10
For Planchet, the dimensions of the catastrophe were all too clear: the Ot-
tomans secretly supported the Druzes in their efforts to reduce Mount
Lebanon’s freedom and to reinstate the “despotism of past times.” The Ot-
toman appointment in early 1842 of Ömer Pasha to directly rule Mount
Lebanon in place of Bashir Qasim confirmed Planchet’s worst fear: “Little
by little the habits, manners and law of the Muslims will be introduced
into the Mountain. It will no longer be what it was: a place of liberty for the
Catholic religion, a refuge for persecuted Christians and converts from Is-
lam.”11
To Planchet and the rest of the Jesuits, to Rose, to Canning, to the
French consul Prosper Bourée and to France’s ambassador in Istanbul, the
Baron de Bourqueney, the intervention of Europe was imperative. What
was at stake in Mount Lebanon was not simply the resolution of an age-old
tribal conflict but the course of modernity, which now stood at a cross-
roads. The Ottoman decision to appoint Ömer Pasha forced the European
powers to temper their own rivalries and to underscore their commitment
to the “just claims of the Christian Powers.”12 In a series of “joint notes,”


[PDF page 90]
72 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
the European powers demanded a non-Ottoman government in Mount
Lebanon despite the fact that several European observers recognized that
direct Ottoman rule might indeed have been best for security and order.13
Canning again invoked the native state of mind. He claimed that such Ot-
toman rule not only was in “direct contradiction with the spirit and prin-
ciples of the later intervention” but “could only be acceptable to the inhab-
itants while their natural feelings are perverted by local and temporary
passions.”14
Yet since these local “passions” threatened to lead to further violence,
some solution had to be found immediately. With this in mind, the Euro-
pean ambassadors converged in the spring and summer of 1842 in Istanbul
to finally settle the problem of sectarian violence. Despite their own quar-
rels, the ambassadors agreed that they had nothing but “benevolent views”
to offer the Sultan on his tentative course toward “modern civilization.”15
Not for a moment did they pause to reflect on their understanding of the
task at hand. They insisted that the origin of the recent violence lay in the
murky primordial past—a past, they hastened to add, which the tribes of
Mount Lebanon in some senses still inhabited and one for which many fa-
natical “Turks” still yearned.
Joining them in Istanbul were numerous Ottoman representatives led
by the foreign minister, Sarim Efendi. Ottoman officials reacted to the sec-
tarian violence by referring to the Lebanese communities as if they were
on a progressive spectrum. At one end was the Sultan, enshrined in Ot-
toman discourse as the all-powerful patriarch of the Ottoman nation, who
had benevolently reached out to all his subjects through the Tanzimat. At
the other end were the Druzes and Maronites, “two sects [that] are full of
sedition and abominable wickedness,” stressed one Ottoman report, “de-
serving all reproach.”16
Such excoriations of the Lebanese communities masked the unease and
frustration evident in the dispatches sent from the restored province by its
governors and military commanders. The acute awareness of Ottoman of-
ficials that European powers intervened through sectarian lines [mezheb-
das¸lık vesile] reinforced their belief in the crucial importance of centraliza-
tion.17 To them, the violence in Mount Lebanon served as a poignant
example of the backwardness of the periphery of their empire. Instead of
the fanatical “Turk” being the antimodern, as in European concepts of
modernity, now it was the Lebanese sects who served as a foil for a mod-
ernizing Ottoman identity. “Because blood feuds are so important to the
inhabitants of rural Syria, as they are for the Albanians,” read one dispatch
concerning the activities of a Druze notable, “[he] acted in accordance with


[PDF page 91]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 73
the proclivity of his race.”18 Like the Europeans, Ottoman functionaries
classified the Lebanese struggles as age-old; like the Europeans, the Ot-
tomans insisted that they sought only to restore order and tranquillity.19
But unlike the Europeans they had neither a clear sense of mission nor an
overwhelming confidence in their ability to have their commands obeyed.
To be sure, the Ottoman authorities differentiated metropole from pe-
riphery and indiscriminately lumped together Yezidis, Druzes, and Alba-
nians; they nevertheless framed their discussion of Mount Lebanon as a
tale of imperial survival. It was not simply that the Druzes and Maronites
were involved in an ancient conflict that would continue “until the Day of
Judgement” but that their disputes threatened the foundations of empire
by inviting European interference.20 On one level, therefore, the Ottoman
reaction to the violence may be read as evidence of a state in transition and
an empire caught between two worlds and two times. As the imperial hon-
orifics that gilded the Sultan’s name suggested, one world evoked a former
grandeur embedded in the idea of absolute Ottoman sovereignty that en-
dured across, and hence defied, the passage of historical time. The other
world was one in which time had passed the empire by or at least threat-
ened to pass it by; it was a world of European domination and intervention,
of Mehmed Ali’s modernization schemes, and of a growing sense of the
backwardness of the empire—the sum of which produced the Gülhane de-
cree. This sense of transition was inscribed in the dispatches themselves.
Men like Mustafa Pasha, commander of the Ottoman army, who was
sent in late 1841 to settle the affairs of Mount Lebanon following the sec-
tarian clashes, epitomized the Ottoman predicament. He began his mission
with a reassertion of social order.21 He summoned the söz sahibleri to
Beirut and relieved Bashir Qasim of his powers; he informed the notables
that the return of the Shihabs was out of the question and announced the
appointment of Ömer Pasha—a high-ranking Ottoman officer of Croatian
origin and a member of Mustafa Pasha’s staff—as governor of Mount
Lebanon.22 Beyond reasserting Ottoman authority in the name of the re-
forming Sultan, Mustafa Pasha symbolically and physically broke with the
old regime by finally abolishing the Shihab dynasty, which had ruled since
1697. Yet this rupture was not complete, for although the Tanzimat was
concerned with building a modern nation, little in the dispatches indicated
how this modernization was to be accomplished.23 Precisely because the
Tanzimat lent itself to a variety of interpretations, including a European
one that mandated interference, the Ottomans considered the reorganiza-
tion of local administration imperative for stifling European involve-
ment.24 The Tanzimat placed the Ottomans in a quandary, for while they


[PDF page 92]
Map 5. Carte de La Terre Sainte en 1849. (From Antoine Philippe Houzé, Atlas
universel historique et géographique. Paris: Librairie Universelle, 1850)


[PDF page 93]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 75
repeatedly pledged to obey the Sultan’s will to reform, they viewed the na-
tives as essentially unreformable subjects. Ottoman officials were certain,
however, that reform and state violence went hand in hand; public order
and security could be guaranteed only by bringing local notables to heel
and by removing their “stupid, silly and fickle” followers from the realm
of politics.25
using the past
Far from being passive objects of the search for a political solution, the lo-
cal elites deftly took advantage of imperial concern to cling to what they
considered their birthright: property, prestige, and a monopoly on politics.
As they outmaneuvered one another, they gave credence to the narratives
reverberating in London, Paris, and Istanbul. Both Druze and Maronite
elites found that their desire for power, and their equally tenacious convic-
tion that only one of them deserved to wield it, could best be served by rep-
resenting themselves as the guardians of tradition and social order and
their rivals as the instigators of perennial perfidy. Druze notables declared
themselves at once to be ardent Muslims loyal to the Sultan and faithful
allies of Great Britain.26 Maronite leaders proclaimed that they were, in
fact, the dutiful supporters of the House of Osman at the same time as
they appealed to France in the name of Christian solidarity.27 Both laid
claim to the mantle of loyalty, and both deployed any number of languages
of legitimacy, particularly those of faith and loyalty, to bolster their re-
spective causes.
Following the fighting at Dayr al-Qamar in 1841, the Maronite Patri-
arch “reminded” the Sublime Porte that Bashir Shihab and the Christians
of Mount Lebanon had always been loyal to the Ottoman state and that it
was the Druzes who had betrayed the Sultan and sided with the Egyptians;
it was only when the Druzes realized that Ibrahim Pasha’s army was
doomed that they switched sides, but in Dayr al-Qamar their true colors
were revealed.28 For his part, the Druze shaykh Khattar al-‘Imad submit-
ted a petition to the Ottoman government in which he outlined his under-
standing of the same events. The Druze leader framed his discussion as an
epic battle between “the sword of Islam,” which he claimed the Druzes
wielded with great pride on behalf of the Sublime Sultanate, and the ene-
mies of Islam, represented by the European-supported Maronites. He
stated that “abandoning the law of Islam, the heretics intended to weaken
Islam and [replace it] with the ways of the infidels, and to hand over the
country to the brigands.” The prospect of such corruption, of heresy re-


[PDF page 94]
76 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
placing faith, “depressed our souls and filled our hearts with disgust,” and
so the battle commenced between the Druzes and the ahali of Dayr al-Qa-
mar.29
What matters here is not the truth of these claims but their underlying
similarity and their mutual commitment to and dependence on a hierar-
chical social order to explain events. ‘Imad’s citing of categorical religious
difference should not obscure his awareness of an essentially social strug-
gle. He freely admitted that the conflict began when the Druze muqata‘jis
attempted to collect the miri tax from the recalcitrant villagers, whom he
contemptuously described as “all along being our lowly and abject [Chris-
tian] subjects.” And he wondered, given this history, “in what conceivable
manner could such behaviour from wretched villagers be endured.”30 It
was not the Christianity of the villagers that worried him; it was their in-
version of social order at the behest of the Shihab emirs and foreign agents.
‘Imad’s concern and his repeated references to foreign agents indicated
that the rituals of old-regime politics were now being played on a new
stage—“a theatre of intrigue,” as an American missionary put it— erected
after 1840.31 The flurry of appeals to different powers marked the attempt
by the local elites to appreciate and adjust to its contours. The tempo of
politics had changed; so too had its stakes. In an era of progressive time, the
elites were terrified of being outmaneuvered and left behind in an
avowedly modern world. Hospitality was extended to foreigners—to con-
suls, to merchants, and to missionaries—not simply as a courtesy to
strangers from distant lands but as an imperative for survival. Both Druze
and Maronite leaders realized that European power could be profitably and
decisively turned to their own advantage. They had seen Ibrahim Pasha’s
modern army destroy several Ottoman armies, only to be crushed by still
greater and more modern European forces.32 They were well aware that
European ships had liberated Syria; European agents had supplied an esti-
mated forty thousand muskets to the region; and European (and Ameri-
can) missionaries provided much-sought-after modern medicine.33 Trade
opportunities also increased, and notables provided land and labor for
newly established silk factories. In return, Europeans and Americans
showered both groups with such attention that it deluded them into
“thinking that they were something important in this world,” in the words
of the French consul Bourée.34 They were given vistas into a much wider
world and the illusion that they were major players in it.
Above all, however, the local elites knew that in the post-Tanzimat
world this power was to be had only along sectarian lines. The objective of


[PDF page 95]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 77
Druze and Maronite elites was not to confirm European or Ottoman atti-
tudes toward them but to manipulate the concern for a reestablishment of
order by presenting themselves as the only genuine interlocutors of the so-
called primordial sectarian communities that inhabited Mount Lebanon.
They sought to transform their religious communities into political com-
munities and to harness invented traditions to their respective causes. The
construction of a political sectarian identity did not come naturally; it en-
tailed petitions, meetings, and the incessant application of moral as well as
physical pressure by the leaders in each community to overcome local ri-
valries, regional differences, and family loyalties.35 Maronite and Druze
elites each strove to present a unified front to the Ottoman state and the
European powers, effectively ignoring a long history of nonsectarian lead-
ership.36 The Maronite Patriarch was well aware of the difficulty of mar-
shaling the Maronites into an organized political community, especially
when an Ottoman commissioner, Selim Bey, was sent to Mount Lebanon
in 1842 to determine whether the local population was in favor of direct
Ottoman administration. The Patriarch made it clear that “we will not ac-
cept, do not desire and will not be content” with any ruler except a Chris-
tian Shihab. Although he insisted that such rule over Lebanon followed
“our custom and ancient regulations,” the Patriarch also requested a delay
in the fact-finding mission. He admitted that he needed time to gather the
respectable faces (awjuh) of the people before the opinions of the ahali
were ascertained. The Patriarch conceded that several Christian notables
had already submitted or were about to submit petitions that opposed the
return of a Shihab ruler. These, he told Selim Bey, must be ignored; only a
Shihab emir must be in overall command. The other shaykhs should be
confirmed in their traditional prerogatives but not as rulers over Mount
Lebanon.37
The process of sectarianizing identity was immensely complex. New
sectarian fears and possibilities still had to contend with old-regime soli-
darities and geographies. Knowledge in prereform society had always been
deployed in the service of power, but it had been hegemonic knowledge.
The secular division between the söz sahibleri and the ahali, the rule of a
Shihab emir, the respect for social rank, and the total obedience to the Sul-
tan were the accepted bases of nonsectarian politics. They accommodated
religious and regional differences and gave expression to, as well as found
expression in, a genealogical geography of Mount Lebanon. For a sectarian
politics to cohere, for it to become hegemonic in a Gramscian sense, it
would have to become an expression of everyday life; it would have to


[PDF page 96]
78 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
stamp itself indelibly on geography and history. In this task, as with so
much else in this era of reform, the interplay between local and foreign
played an immeasurable role.
sectarianizing the landscape
The European and Ottoman characterization of “age-old” religious tur-
moil not only absolved the European powers and the Ottoman Empire of
any responsibility for the violence but reflected their ardent conviction
that they alone knew this region and that they alone could properly reform
it. The repeated Ottoman references to the zabt ü rabt, discipline which or-
ders and restrains, necessary for the good government of unruly Mount
Lebanon, were echoed in Lord Palmerston’s declaration before the House of
Commons in 1845 that “when such men are intermixed, as they are in
Lebanon, occupying the same village, dwelling on the same land, con-
stantly meeting in the same town, it evidently requires a vigorous hand, a
powerful head, a strong, determined will, together with sound judgement,
to repress the tendency to disorder which must exist in such a state of so-
ciety.”38 European and Ottoman concern for an allegedly native disorder
mandated a decisive effort to rebuild a sectarian orthodoxy where none
had previously existed.
Throughout 1842 the European ambassadors and Ottoman foreign
ministry officials and military commanders met and debated the issue of
communal violence. Throughout that year the fate of Mount Lebanon
hung in the balance. The Lebanese notables waited for word of the deci-
sions of the Great Powers and the Sublime Porte. In May and June, confer-
ences convened and adjourned, with the European powers and the Ot-
toman government unable to agree on the exact formulation of the new
sectarian order. The Europeans, led by Canning, urged the partition of
Mount Lebanon along religious lines. The Ottomans were opposed; they
insisted that the population was far too mixed for an effective partition.39
Canning, who had never visited Mount Lebanon, dismissed Ottoman con-
cerns for the “extraneous population”—that is to say the population who
marred the logic of partition by living in religiously mixed villages. When
the Ottomans again tabled proposals for direct Ottoman rule and rejected
partition on the basis that it would “prove to be a fresh element of disor-
der,” the exasperated European ambassadors implored them “to take a
more statesmanlike view of the question.”40 Meanwhile, Lord Aberdeen
urged Canning not to relent. “I have been informed that difficulties would
attend the execution of this plan, in consequence of the great intermixture


[PDF page 97]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 79
of the Druses and Maronites which might under their separate govern-
ment [be] scarcely practicable. This may certainly be the case in particular
districts, and some means must be devised to remedy the inconven-
ience.”41
Faced with an intransigent European position, Sarim Efendi, in a Sep-
tember meeting at his summer house which lasted more than six hours,
asked the assembled ambassadors if the “Powers have the intention of im-
posing their will on the Porte.” The French ambassador said no. Speaking
for all the ambassadors, he stated that they were only offering “advice”
and, in turn, wanted to know whether the Porte wanted to establish regu-
lar relations with “Europe.”42 Finally, on December 7, a beleaguered Sarim
Efendi conceded the point. The Sublime Porte accepted the idea that Mount
Lebanon would be formally divided; however, it added ominously that it
thought the plan was a recipe for disaster.43 So the ambassadors and a re-
luctant Ottoman government together made a fateful decision that created
a sectarian geography in Mount Lebanon. Like Salman Rushdie’s “mid-
night’s children,” Cebel-i Lübnan—a term that came into Ottoman usage
at precisely this time—was born to signify a new beginning for the region,
but also a tragic inheritance.
Ömer Pasha’s short tenure as governor came to an abrupt end. Mount
Lebanon was cut in half. The Northern district (nasara kaymakamlıg˘ı)
was meant to be a homogenous “Christian” area ruled by a Christian dis-
trict governor (kaymakam), and the southern district (dürzi kay-
makamlıg˘ı) was to be a distinctly “Druze” region ruled by a Druze district
governor. Ottoman officials estimated that the population of Mount
Lebanon was roughly two hundred thousand, of which the Druzes consti-
tuted forty thousand. With the exception of the Matn district, where many
Druzes resided, the vast majority of the inhabitants of the northern Chris-
tian district were Christian. The problem lay in the southern Druze dis-
trict, where the Christians also formed a majority, with the exception of
the Shuf, in which Dayr al-Qamar was located.44 The Maronite Church
continued to press for Maronite Christian rule over all of Mount Lebanon,
whereas Druze elites staunchly opposed handing over any power to Chris-
tian villagers. While they acknowledged that the Christian population had
increased over the years, Druze notables insisted that the villages were
built by their own ancestors and, hence, belonged to them. Two myths,
each distilled from a grain of truth, confronted each other: the first was the
Maronite Patriarch’s claim that tradition sanctioned “Christian” rule over
all of Mount Lebanon; the second was the Druze kaymakam’s claim that
tradition consisted of a benevolent patriarchy “because the notable consid-


[PDF page 98]
80 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
ers the inhabitants of his district as if they were his children, and [they, in
turn] consider the notable a father.”45
Such are the irrefutable facts that boldly present themselves: partition
was not a local decision, and the natives were not consulted but were de-
picted as savage mountaineers incapable of solving their own problems. To
this extent at least, what followed in Mount Lebanon over the next two
decades should be interpreted in light of the arrogance of imperial powers
who dismissed as an “inconvenience” centuries of native coexistence.46 It
is also clear that with partition the very notion of coexistence became a
vexing issue in a society increasingly defined along religious lines. The
logic of partition demanded the unambiguous classification of the local in-
habitants into one or another camp, either Christian or non-Christian. The
European-designed partition plan assumed that there were in fact two dis-
tinct and separate primordial tribes of Druzes and Maronites to which all
Druzes and all Maronites instinctively adhered. Leaving aside the fact that
Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholic communities resented being under
Maronite tutelage, the partition legitimated sectarian politics by organiz-
ing the administration and geography of Mount Lebanon along religious
lines.47
Although both Maronite and Druze elites were unhappy with the par-
tition decision (for it satisfied neither the Maronite demand for a return of
the Christian Shihab emirate nor the Druze claim that they were the orig-
inal proprietors of Mount Lebanon), the rival elites quickly adapted to the
fait accompli of partition. They still maintained their old-regime rank and
titles, and yet they were fully aware of the high stakes involved in acting
as leaders of separate nations. Whichever side could convince the European
powers and the Sublime Porte of the justice of its cause as a coherent com-
munity would win the bounty of land and control of the mixed villages.
Partition provided a new setting for a familiar story of elite rivalries, but it
changed the nature of the rivalry, the representation of the rivals, and the
definition of local communities. New categories of “Christian” or “Druze”
rule were created alongside the idea of “mixed” villages and “minorities.”
European consuls and missionaries involved themselves more than ever
before in the minutest details of everyday politics; at the same time, they
were actively sought out by local elites to mediate among them.
sectarian paths of development
Violence and partition cleared the way for sectarian paths of development.
Now that Mount Lebanon was geographically reformed, the fractious


[PDF page 99]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 81
elites, the Ottoman government, and the foreign missionaries began to
think of how to construct a modern society. The discourse of restoration
flowed into a discourse of progress. The question was no longer simply
how best to return to tradition but how to use knowledge of the past to
build a stable future. A number of quite different schemes were proposed,
all guided by the assumption of an untraversable difference that separated
Druze from Maronite and all consumed with the idea that religion was
the single most important political identification of each villager. Some
schemes, such as the Maronite Bishop Nicolas Murad’s 1844 tour of Eu-
rope as well as his polemical writing, represented a vision of a Christian-
dominated Mount Lebanon in which Druzes were included in a subordi-
nated position. Other schemes involved diplomatic efforts to build a
sectarian administration in an attempt to reconcile allegedly ancient dif-
ferences by creating a religiously balanced public sphere. Still others, such
as the Jesuit efforts to reform local Christianity, worked in precisely the
opposite direction, for they promoted segregated Christian spaces. The
upshot was that history, politics, and education—which in the old regime
had reinforced a nonsectarian hierarchical social order—were all put to
work to create a sectarian hierarchical social order. I want to draw atten-
tion here to the ambivalence of this process—to the novelty of these proj-
ects of reform, which tried to reorganize physical and cultural space in ac-
cordance with a sectarian vision of the past, and to the underlying tension
between the legacy of imperial sovereign time and the arrival of progres-
sive time. This ambivalence becomes particularly clear if the disparate
sectarian projects are analyzed side by side, that is to say, in and as mo-
ments of production rather than as coherent reflections of objective con-
ditions.48
Nowhere was this tension more manifest than in new local histories.
Unlike the old-regime chronicles, historical writings in the postreform era
displayed a variety of narrative forms and addressed foreign and domestic
audiences. They reflected both formal and informal subjecthood. Perhaps
not surprisingly, the period between 1840 and 1860 produced one of the
first teleological histories, Nicholas Murad’s Notice historique sur l’origine
de la nation Maronite et sur ses rapports avec la France, sur la nation
Druze et sur les diverses populations du Mont Liban, and the last of the
sweeping historical chronicles, Tannus al-Shidyaq’s Kitab akhbar al-a‘yan
fi Jabal
Lubnan.49
While Shidyaq’s history, which was first published in 1859, presented a
definitive history of the old regime—it was almost exclusively preoccu-
pied with the genealogy and history of the notable families of Mount


[PDF page 100]
82 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
Lebanon—the work of Maronite Bishop Murad represented a vision of a
new Christian regime.50 Murad himself in many ways embodied the tran-
sition from the old-regime politics of notability, in which he began his ca-
reer teaching the children of local notables, to an emerging sectarian order,
in which he became the most eloquent spokesman for a communal vision
of Mount Lebanon. Murad was a man comfortable both in an Ottoman and
in a European context. In a meeting with the Ottoman foreign minister, he
stressed Maronite obedience and loyalty to the Sublime Porte. To “Eu-
rope,” however, he appealed in the name of Christendom in his 1844 No-
tice historique. Murad’s Notice also heralded a significant rupture in both
its narrative form and its content. The Notice was a polemic that presented
a coherent sectarian vision of the history and future of Mount Lebanon;
written in French and addressed to Louis-Philippe, it interpreted the sec-
tarian violence as a Christian struggle for survival—a saga of the Maro-
nite ta’ifa as a nation that was attempting to take its rightful place along-
side the European Christian states. The Notice fused a European
nationalist idea with a tradition of Maronite ecclesiastical autonomy to
present the case for a Maronite-dominated Christian Lebanon.
Murad’s Lebanon, like that of the European travelers before him, was a
mountain refuge that had long held out against the Saracens and other in-
fidels as an “independent” Christian principality. After making the claim
of Maronite orthodoxy and unwavering devotion to Catholicism and em-
phasizing the Maronites’ anti-Jacobin counterrevolutionary credentials,
Murad recorded a history of Lebanon in which the Shihabs ranked first,
followed by other Christian notable families. The Druzes were left on the
margins of the narrative: Murad argued they were outsiders who had been
attracted to Christian Mount Lebanon and were given the title of shaykhs
because of services they had rendered to the Shihabs. Moreover, the
Druzes professed “idolatry,” and, even more, they signified the unmodern,
the “fanatical,” and the lazy: “The Druze is generally lazy and idle; the
only work that he engages in is plowing; all crafts [métiers] are unknown
to him. With the exception of very few individuals who have frequent or
intimate relations with Christians, the Druzes know neither reading nor
writing; they could not live without Christians, who to the contrary, are
familiar with all the professions exercised in Europe.”51
By creating this absolute distinction between Maronite and Druze and
by conveniently presenting the Maronites as the original possessors of the
land to which the Druzes were latecomers, Murad was not only legitimat-
ing the Maronite Church’s position on restoration but was also reworking
Maronite identity, casting it in imaginary national sectarian terms that to-


[PDF page 101]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 83
tally excluded the Druzes. Loyal to France and to the Crusaders, loyal to
the idea and existence of Christianity in the Orient, and on the front line
between Christendom and barbarism, Murad’s Maronites urgently needed
French assistance in the troubled postrestoration times. “Lebanon,” he
wrote, is “like another French land,” and France was the “seconde patrie
des Maronites.” 52 To add scientific evidence to his various arguments, Mu-
rad concluded his narrative with appendices that explain the “genealogy of
the [Christian] Princes of Lebanon” and that enumerated the different pop-
ulations of Mount Lebanon in which the Maronites, of course, constituted
the overwhelming majority.
Murad’s fabrications per se are not important; the implications sur-
rounding them are. The text was modern in that it framed Murad’s appeal
as part of a wider struggle of a modern, progressive, and united Christian-
ity against a barbarous Islam. But more than that, the narrative form of the
document, with its appendices and genealogies, ruled out any margin of er-
ror. The truths Murad presented were as stark and evident to his mind as
the existence of a pure and Catholic Maronite tradition. Moreover, he in-
terpreted the sectarian violence of the 1840s as part of a wider Muslim plot
to destroy Christianity in the Holy Land, and he perceived the Druzes as
the agents of this diabolical scheme. While he stressed the unbridgeable
temporal and sacred distance between the Maronites as modern Catholics
and the Druze as uncivilized “infidels,” Murad was at pains to portray the
Maronites as not just pro-French but actually French people living in a
specific territory known as the Mountain Refuge.53
Murad’s use of the term ahali signified the ambiguity in the parti-
tioned landscape. On the one hand, the term ahali retained its old-
regime connotation of belonging to the nonelite, and with its continued
use in this sense—for example, in Ottoman reports—the old-regime
social order was constantly reaffirmed. On the other hand, another,
more equivocal connotation of the term arose in which the ahali became
synonymous with the “people” of a nation. Thus, when Murad referred
to himself as the “general representative of the Christian people” or
when the Maronite Patriarch referred to the ahali, they were marking a
political boundary between Maronites and non-Maronites in addition to
a social boundary between notables and commoners. Yet for all its evo-
cation of a Maronite nation, Murad’s vision was not a populist one. It
was an elitist narration that claimed to speak for all Maronites. The idea
of community was no longer an elite one that crossed religious bound-
aries but one that was entirely subsumed within the religious commu-
nity. Yet like the söz sahibleri of the old regime, the representatives of


[PDF page 102]
84 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
the new sectarian vision were still elites. Murad’s goal was not to reform
the social order of Mount Lebanon but to stamp a Christian identity on
that order. Herein lies the central problem of his vision: how to reconcile
a communal vision of Mount Lebanon and maintain the old-regime so-
cial order.
This was precisely the task that the new Ottoman foreign minister,
S¸ ekib Efendi, gave himself when he was ordered to Mount Lebanon in
1845 to pacify the province following another bout of intercommunal vio-
lence. To a large extent, S¸ ekib Efendi personified the contradictions of the
Tanzimat, for he tried to reimpose absolute Ottoman sovereignty while
recognizing the limits of Ottoman power. He promoted an official Ot-
toman nationalism in an effort to contain sectarian mobilizations, but he
was unwilling to countenance any interpretation of the Tanzimat that gave
the local subjects an autonomous voice. In short, he was aware of the pres-
sure from Europe that motivated Ottoman reform, but he categorically re-
fused to accept that this pressure forced the Ottoman authorities to alter
their relationship to imperial subjects. Ottoman officials were willing to
concede that they should treat Maronites and Druzes equally (which, ef-
fectively, had been the case during the old regime), but they did not take
this to mean that they should relate to them differently: as center to pe-
riphery and as Ottoman to rural.
S¸ ekib Efendi’s vision of a new sectarian order, known as the Règlement
of S¸ ekib Efendi, was based on the notion of an “ancient” rivalry between
two distinct sides.54 Because he was convinced that the Druzes had been
oppressive “for a long time [kadimdenberu],” S¸ ekib Efendi felt that the
Christians of the mixed districts would never willingly accept the reimpo-
sition of Druze rule. In his judgment, the only solution short of a popula-
tion transfer, which he rejected, lay in the creation of an intricate system of
sectarian checks and balances. He reconfirmed the kaymakams in their re-
spective positions, but he created for each district an administrative coun-
cil which included a judge and an advisor for each of the Maronite, Druze,
Sunni, Greek Orthodox, and Greek Catholic sects.55 Although these coun-
cils encroached on the traditional autonomy of the muqata‘jis, S¸ ekib
Efendi nevertheless reconfirmed the notables in their responsibility to
maintain law and order.56 The Ottoman foreign minister stipulated that
wherever the notables and the population were of different “race” and
“sect,” a wakil, or representative of the same “race” of the population,
would be appointed to oversee the administration of the notable.57 When
two people of the same “race” and “sect” (hemcins ve hemmezheb) were
involved in a petty dispute and they were of the same sect as the notable,


[PDF page 103]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 85
then that notable would adjudicate; if they were of the wakil’s sect, then the
wakil would settle the dispute; however, if it was a mixed dispute, then the
wakil and the notable would work together, and if they couldn’t agree, then
they would submit it to their respective kaymakams of the same sect
(hemmillet). If they still couldn’t agree, then the Ottoman governor of the
Sayda would have the final word.58
Among S¸ ekib’s first acts was to summon both Druze and Maronite no-
tables to underscore the importance of the immediate restoration of tran-
quillity. Despite admonishing them for following the “path of vagabond-
age,” S¸ ekib reminded the local notables that they were “men of
intelligence [eshab-ı ukul]” and hence obligated to join together to restore
peace and security.59 S¸ ekib Efendi deployed the language of the Tan-
zimat— compatriotism and equality—to evoke the idea of belonging to a
single nation, but he also reminded the local notables that they had little
choice but to obey his commands. They must submit or be subjected “to all
kinds of affliction and harm and all kinds of punishment and retribu-
tion.”60
Such threats notwithstanding, a basic tension plagued S¸ ekib Efendi’s
proposal. Although he described the notables as compatriots in a common
land (vatandas¸lar), his regulations reinforced the idea of sectarian division
by creating parallel governments. The French consul Bourée noted this
contradiction when he confessed that the solutions proffered by the Sub-
lime Porte amounted to the “organization of civil war.”61 S¸ ekib Efendi
urged the notables to display their zeal for the nation, but he clipped their
wings by creating a massively complicated sectarian wakil system. He gave
the ahali hope of representation, but he insisted that wakils come “from
respectable households” and work toward preserving a social order in
which commoners again submitted to their traditional notables.62 S¸ ekib
Efendi hinted at the possibility of a free, equal, and modern Ottoman sub-
ject who was meant to have faith in, and owe loyalty to, an abstract Ot-
toman nation. Yet his belief in the primordial religious passions of the lo-
cal inhabitants and his own commitment to social hierarchy, in which all
members of the nation knew their proper place, ensured that they could
express their belonging to the Ottoman nation only as members of segre-
gated sectarian and social communities. As sincerely as he desired to “see
that Druzes and Maronites are treated equally,” he succeeded only in legit-
imating two separate sectarian political communities.63 Because S¸ ekib
Efendi conflated hemcins, hemmillet, and hemmezheb, he bolstered the
idea that religion and ethnicity were one and the same in Mount
Lebanon—unchangeable, irreducible, and therefore inevitably at the heart


[PDF page 104]
86 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
of any project of reform. And although S¸ ekib Efendi recognized the new-
ness of his own legislation, he developed it in accordance with his percep-
tion of a primitive sectarian landscape.
Emblematic of the tension between old and new that gnawed at the co-
herence of S¸ ekib Efendi’s vision was his decision to force the notables to
sign and accept a peace treaty based on the principle of mada ma mada, “to
let bygones be bygones.”64 This familiar rhetorical device discursively
abolished the memory of transgression and underscored the Ottoman de-
sire to restore an allegedly traditional status quo ante of political sectarian
harmony under benevolent Ottoman rule. It recalled the infallible imperial
domain of obedience outside the strictures of historical time, and yet it was
linked to a project steeped in the new language of the Tanzimat, of equal-
ity, progress, and reform. The elites were rehabilitated in the eyes of the
state, and the ahali were urged to tend to their traditional affairs of pro-
viding taxes and working the land under the uneasy control of their nota-
bles. With his work done, an exhausted but contented S¸ ekib Efendi re-
turned to Istanbul, leaving Mount Lebanon to sort out the contradictions
of his new sectarian order.
The truth of the matter was that the simple explanations offered by Ot-
toman statesmen for the communal troubles—their references to Euro-
pean plotting that encouraged a primitive conflict—masked complex real-
ities that undercut even their most sincere efforts at reform. Even as S¸ ekib
Efendi worked to enmesh sectarian identity within a series of overlapping
and mutually reinforcing administrative arrangements, the theoretical
framework of absolute Ottoman sovereignty and the concomitant notion
of total Ottoman power on which his entire system depended were being
steadily eroded. Not only were Ottoman officials plagued by a chronic fi-
nancial crisis that left soldiers’ payments in arrears for months on end, but
they were frustrated by the ability of the local inhabitants to circumvent
their authority.
An incident in October 1845 indicated the gray area of an emerging sec-
tarian politics that tested the boundaries of legitimacy and sovereignty in
Mount Lebanon. Ottoman soldiers arrived in the coastal town of Juniya in
the district of Kisrawan to disarm what they considered to be its violence-
prone ahali. At daybreak a few days later, they entered and cordoned off
the nearby towns of Zuq Mikayil and Zuq Musbah. The commanding offi-
cer, mirliva (major-general) Ibrahim, ordered all the villagers to assemble
and had the disarmament orders read out to the population. The troops be-
gan to search the village and to round up those who had not heard the
reading of the orders. By chance a major by the name of Has¸im Ag˘a came


[PDF page 105]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 87
across “a zimmi (dhimmi, non-Muslim) on horseback dressed in civilian
clothes.” When Has¸im Ag˘a ordered the Christian—who remains without
name in the document—to appear before mirliva Ibrahim, the Christian
“with violence and rudeness” refused and promptly escaped.65 Immedi-
ately thereafter, on another street an officer named Salih Ag˘a happened on
the same Christian and tried once more to “politely” summon the Chris-
tian to mirliva Ibrahim by calling out to him, “You there! Go listen to the
decree.” This time the Christian allegedly began to incite the people with
gestures of his hand, at which Salih Ag˘a ordered the Christian forcibly dis-
mounted and escorted him to the mirliva.66
When the Christian was brought before mirliva Ibrahim, he was asked
why he had not come to listen to the decree. “I am from Beirut,” he an-
swered with “rudeness and harshness [s¸iddet ve hus¸unet],” and again he
had the “fanciful” idea of escaping and began pushing his guards; the re-
port states that “to make an example of him for the others, a few lashes of
the whip were administered to him and he was thrown in prison.”67 Until
this point, the story recounts an encounter between representatives of the
Ottoman state and a local inhabitant who had violated the limits of old-
regime subjecthood. Not only did the term zimmi belong to a classification
of Ottoman subjects supposedly superseded by the Tanzimat, but the
forcible removal of the recalcitrant zimmi from his horse restored a sense
of Ottoman propriety and order.
However, much to the chagrin of the officer writing the report, this
wretched zimmi resisted the authority of the Ottoman state. When the
Christian was imprisoned by the Ottoman soldiers, he informed his sen-
tries that “I am the brother of the dragoman of the French consul” and
claimed to be a subject of the French state. The sentries reported this to the
mirliva, who summoned the prisoner and, with slightly more trepidation
than before, asked him why he was traveling in these parts. The Christian
“made it seem as if” he had come to buy some silk. The mirliva then asked
him “if it were not more appropriate for you to buy silk in Beirut, espe-
cially since everybody else knows that it was not permitted to come here at
this time, and thus your being here is very inappropriate.” The Christian
responded by saying only that “I am the brother of the French [consul’s]
dragoman and I can come and go here as I please and nobody can stand in
my way.”68
When the French consul was informed of this incident, he demanded
that the Christian be released at once; the Ottomans hesitated to comply,
and so the consul wasted little time in ordering one of the French frigates
off Beirut to proceed immediately to Juniya.69 The prisoner was duly re-


[PDF page 106]
88 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
leased to the “rude and shameless [edepsizlik eylemekleri]” French.70 The
tables were turned; the humiliated Ottoman officers were forced to ac-
knowledge that in sectarian Mount Lebanon, the old forms of coercion and
obedience could no longer be deployed without resistance—that they now
coexisted with new forms of authority and identity that emerged from the
interstices of local identity and international diplomacy. In an era domi-
nated by the European powers on cultural, economic, and military levels,
the channels of power flowed not just unilaterally from Istanbul but to and
from European capitals.
embracing “progress”
Perhaps the greatest symbol of the new sectarian climate was the consoli-
dation of the missionary movement in its “mountain refuge.” By their
own admission, foreign missionaries were well positioned to take advan-
tage of the political and military upheavals of the Egyptian occupation and
the subsequent era of reform.71 They presented their own sectarian vision
of Mount Lebanon, which entirely bypassed the political exigencies and
compromises that consumed S¸ ekib Efendi. Unarmed Jesuit and Protestant
missionaries possessed an enormous advantage over Ottoman officials, for
they were at the vanguard of a cultural movement that allowed for a two-
way exchange. They provided the elites with seemingly viable and modern
sectarian paths of development. They cultivated them as modern leaders
of their sectarian communities and offered them the support and protec-
tion of Europe.72 In return, the local elites protected and gave land to the
missionaries. The söz sahibleri encouraged the secular aspects of mission-
ary work, which in turn prompted the missionaries to persist in their ulti-
mate goal of reconstituting a Christian hierarchy amenable to spiritual re-
form.
Despite the fact that the missionaries incessantly complained of the
degradation and corruption of local Christianity and despite their constant
references to the imminent peril posed by Islam, Jesuit and American mis-
sionaries found themselves completely free to begin their task of “civiliza-
tion.” The Jesuits, for example, astutely took advantage of their friendly
relations with several Egyptian generals, and after the generals were ex-
pelled in 1840, the Jesuits capitalized on the prevailing Ottoman disinter-
est in rural Syria. As long as they did not proselytize among the Muslims
of Syria, they found their work unhampered.73 In Zahla, for example,
Planchet confessed from the outset of the mission that “for us, Europeans,
we live here in total independence of local government, and have complete


[PDF page 107]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 89
liberty to carry on with our sacred ministry, particularly in Mount
Lebanon, whose population is, in large part, Catholic.”74
The ability of the Jesuits and, indeed, all other missionaries to function
with such freedom was facilitated by their self-cultivated image as shep-
herds of secular modernity. As much as the Jesuits and the Protestants de-
nounced and competed with each other, they understood full well that they
shared common technologies over which they both claimed to be masters.
A Jesuit missionary, Edouard Billotet, complained in 1857 that the Jesuits
were losing ground to the Protestants in Sayda because “their science, their
polite manners and above all their charitable use of medicine are popular
with the Christians of this town. . . . We can force them out entirely if we
could present to the people a devoted and charitable doctor.”75 From the
outset of their mission, the Jesuits confessed that “we find in [medicine] an
easy, perhaps even unique, method to introduce ourselves to the Muslims
and the Druze.” Accordingly they spent several hours each day studying
basic medicine.76 The physician Henze was particularly valuable, and
many of the important Druze and Christian notables in the land called on
his services.77 Even the Maronite Patriarch asked the Jesuit missionary
Paul Riccadonna to intercede with Rome to send more men like Henze,
whose knowledge and power of healing were well appreciated.78
Certainly, the missionaries’ deployment of modern medicine was in-
tended to aid in the overall spiritual salvation of the local population. But
it was also undeniably an integral part of what James Axtell has likened to
an “invasion within.”79 The focus of the Jesuits, for example, was no
longer educating a few Lebanese in the Maronite College in Rome. The
purpose of the College had been largely achieved: it had successfully “re-
formed” the Maronite Church and had Latinized it to a large degree. In the
nineteenth century, the Jesuits’ goal was far more ambitious and far more
complex, for they aimed to “regenerate” an entire population primarily
through the medium of local education. At the same time as they fended
off Protestant encroachment on their terre sainte, the Jesuits did not want
to “denature” the native, to make him desire Europe so much that it would
alienate him linguistically and culturally. Instead they sought to reform
him sufficiently so that he would be content with life in the Orient. To that
end, schools and colleges had to be formed and maintained in the Orient.80
To both Protestant and Catholic missionaries, spiritual and temporal mod-
ernization were one and the same thing. In the eyes of priests like Ric-
cadonna and pastors like Henry Harris Jessup, the native lack of moral and
religious constitution was reflected in the status of local women and in the
absence of modern (Western) furniture, education, medicine, and knowl-


[PDF page 108]
90 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
edge.81 To remedy this deficiency, the missionaries unleashed, in their own
words, a cultural assault on the corrupt traditions of Mount Lebanon.
Although it is difficult to gauge the immediate results of the Jesuits and
the American missionaries in this regard, for the work was perforce gener-
ational, over the thirty-year period between 1830 and 1860, substantial
changes were effected. Forks and knives were introduced, print technology
increased, and the use of European and American furniture became more
widespread. William Benton, an American stationed in Bhamdun, reported
that “civilization enters [Lebanese] habitations in the form of chairs, ta-
bles, etc.”82 The most obvious sign of change, however, was the spread of
mission schools across Syria.83 As early as 1834, the Americans opened a
girls’ school; the Lazarists reopened ‘Ayntura in the same year and took
over several monasteries across Mount Lebanon, including one in Rayfun.
The Americans then set up a secondary school in ‘Abay in 1843, and three
years later the Jesuits established their famous seminary in Ghazir, on land
purchased from a Shihab emir.
Missionary schools were the most active sites of reform. Initially, the
education the Jesuit missionaries provided was ecclesiastical in nature or at
least heavily ecclesiastical in form, with religious services and sermons, re-
treats, and catechisms taking up large parts of the school day. The Ameri-
cans, too, at first directed an ecclesiastical assault on the local Christian
communities. They distributed tracts and polemics in a vain attempt to
convince the “nominal” Christians of Syria of their intellectual and spiri-
tual degradation. But the emirs and the elites sought a secular rather than
an ecclesiastical education, and neither Jesuits nor Protestants could ignore
this demand if they indeed desired to maintain a credible presence on the
land. The missionaries of the American Board of Commissioners for For-
eign Missions, therefore, abandoned their futile effort at open assault and
instead concentrated on opening schools that catered to native demand.84
Not to be outdone, the Jesuits reacted by admitting into their seminary in
Ghazir students whose parents wanted only an “education for the world.”
One Jesuit priest lamented that “we are faced with a fait accompli.”85
There is great irony, of course, in the fact that local desire for secular
modern knowledge (as opposed to ecclesiastical or evangelical knowledge)
was controlled largely by missionaries, and hence that knowledge was dis-
seminated along sectarian lines. In this respect, missionaries played as cru-
cial a part in sectarianizing the landscape of Mount Lebanon as did Euro-
pean and Ottoman diplomats and local elites. The bitter rivalry between
Protestant and Catholic missionaries played itself out across a shadow par-
tition of Mount Lebanon that presaged and then blossomed alongside the


[PDF page 109]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 91
formal partition of 1842. Early American polemics against the “papism”
and “ignorance” of the Maronite clergy heightened the clergy’s ecclesiasti-
cal consciousness, and the celebrated conversion of the Maronite As‘ad al-
Shidyaq (Tannus al-Shidyaq’s brother) to Protestantism in the late 1820s
prompted the Maronite Church to prohibit all contact with the Protes-
tants.86 Moreover, Jesuits aggressively staked their claims to the Catholic
inhabitants of the region, especially in and around Kisrawan, while Protes-
tant missionaries focused on the more heterogeneous Druze-dominated
Shuf.
Neither side explicitly acknowledged the hegemony of the other, and
yet a modus vivendi was established. The American missionaries came to
rely on the local protection of the Druze notables and the formal protection
of the British consul, while Druze notables understood that the American
missionaries were a conduit to British power. Indeed, the missionaries of
the American Board made little effort to dispel the notion among the
Druze notables that they were connected to imperial power. “[The Druzes]
appear to have the most entire confidence in our missionaries,” confided
Benton while stationed in the village of Bhamdun, “and say if they were
not Druzes they would be English Protestants. We are often confounded
with the English, and known as Americans, often do not attempt to disa-
buse the minds of these mountaineers of this mistake. Many of them have
no conception of geography.”87 The Jesuits, however, looked to the Maro-
nite authorities and French consulate for backing, and the Maronite Patri-
arch readily grasped the importance of the Jesuits as a connection to
Catholic Europe. Finally, in the absence of any Ottoman interest in the
general education of its rural subjects, Druze and Maronite elites turned to
the missionaries to provide a modern education for their children. Druzes,
by and large, sent their children to Protestant schools and accepted an im-
plicit orientation toward Britain, whereas Maronites embraced the Jesuit
schools and thereby committed themselves to an explicit orientation to-
ward France. Modern education did not stem from, and hence reinforce, a
religiously integrative social order but reflected, and gave credence to, a re-
ligiously segregated landscape.
Nowhere was the attempt to disengage from traditional society more
evident than in the Jesuit schools. Because missionaries like Riccadonna
and Louis Abougit believed that native Christians were corrupted by their
neighborliness with Muslim and Druze villagers, they envisioned pure
Christian spaces to be indispensable for reform. Riccadonna expressed his
revulsion at the intermingling of Muslim and Christian, at the Christians’
practice of adopting Muslim names, and at their habitual invocation of the


[PDF page 110]
92 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
prophet Muhammad, while Abougit was scandalized by what passed for
normal behavior in Sayda:
We are sorry to say that there was a sort of coexistence [fusion] between
the Christians and Muslims of Sayda. They visited each other fre-
quently, which resulted in intimate relations between them and which
introduced, bit by bit, a community of ideas and habits all of which was
at the expense of the Christians. These latter joined in the important
Muslim feasts, and the Muslims [in turn] joined in the Christian feasts;
this kind of activity passed for good manners, sociability, while in truth
it resulted in nothing more than the weakening of religious senti-
88
ments.
In seminaries like Ghazir the most invidious work of a new sectarian
outlook took its slow course. There native students became deeply involved
with the passions and experiences of Occidental Christianity and European
history. Jesuit priests sheltered them from their indigenous surroundings
and inculcated in them the order of counterrevolutionary modernity. The
students were taught to respect Catholic France and, implicitly, to disdain
their immediate surroundings. They were made to submit to a new hierar-
chy that began not in the rural village but in the Jesuit school and that
ended not with the Sultan in Istanbul but with the Pope in Rome.
From their enclaves of “pure” Occidental Christianity, the Jesuits pene-
trated the home and the family. In 1859, a Jesuit priest who accompanied
several French noblemen to Ghazir reported, much to his satisfaction, that
the students were well advanced in the gentle crusade. At the entrance to
the village, the students of the college received him and his traveling com-
panions with cries “a thousand times repeated” of “Long live the French
pilgrims!” Astonished by this reception, the visitors were moved by the
melange of students, of Greeks, Maronites, Arabs, and Armenians, united
“in a single thought of love for those whom they hailed as the representa-
tives of France.”89
Later at dinner, the students several times toasted the honor of France,
and afterward the visitors were regaled by the sounds of civilized native
tongues that expounded on a “new order of things.” Several of the bright-
est students took turns explaining to the visitors the history of the school,
the curriculum, and the goals of a “modern” education. They began by ex-
plaining the importance of situating a school in the Orient and not in Eu-
rope, for, as one of the students explained with pride, “With God’s help,
you will give us the science and the piety of the clergy of Europe. You will
initiate us into civilization, enough to enhance the influence of our min-


[PDF page 111]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 93
istry before our compatriots, but not enough to make us abandon the sim-
ple patriarchal life of our country. Salut, Ghazir, haven of our youth! . . .
Salut, brilliant aurora, precursor of more beautiful days. Salut!” Then an-
other student rose and described how the notion of progress had been in-
culcated into the student body, how Europe had been represented, and how
“debased” the stagnant Orient would remain without European aid and
civilization. Even the Muslims would have to bow before the imperatives
of time and modernity, as “their contact with the civilized peoples inspires
amongst many of them a desire for progress which raises them to the level
of European nations.” New linear notions of time had not only been taught
to the students but had been imbibed by them. After a break for refresh-
ments, served by the “Arab” students, the visitors were once more enter-
tained. With the “terror” of 1848 behind them, explained a third student,
the Jesuits courted the elites of the country, whose sons would one day be
called to rule, and provided them with what they desired, an education for
a changing world. Finally, a student from the notable Maronite Hubaysh
family summed up the moral of the story, extolling the virtues of France:
“Thanks to your influence, thanks to the noble zeal of French hearts, the
seminary at Ghazir will live. The tree of faith, that of civilization, will grow
in our land scorched by the sun of Asia; the Greek, Armenian, Maronite
and Syrian nations will rest in the shade of its branches, and the leaders
and old men of the country, the object of your solicitude, will recount to
the new generations the kindness of France.”90
These products of a Jesuit education reflected with pride on their sense
of accomplishment. While they had once been merely the sons of powerful
families, they were now “civilized” sons of powerful families. From now
on, the reality of the “new order of things” was stamped on their young
minds. Without France, there was aridity. Without some level of (but not
too much) “civilization,” there was sterility. Without the Jesuit fathers,
there was an emptiness, a void that could no longer be filled by the sud-
denly small, suddenly uncivilized traditions and customs of their culture.
Best of all, the students informed their illustrious visitors that although
Ghazir had once boasted a mosque, now it had vanished—“stones and
Muslims, have altogether disappeared.”91 Jesuit Ghazir exemplified how a
notion of historical progress embedded itself within a reworked sense of a
sectarian community. In Ghazir an understanding of an organic past that
nurtured the present was abandoned wholesale; the barrenness of local tra-
ditions was accepted as fact by the students. By severing themselves com-
pletely from their indigenous past, by making it foreign, and by embracing
the Jesuits as community, Riccadonna’s Maronite disciples willingly subor-


[PDF page 112]
94 / Reinventing Mount Lebanon
dinated themselves to a sectarian modernity. They adopted Jesuit manners
and language, most often French but also Italian; they believed that their
tie to Catholic Europe was umbilical; and they exhibited a newly instilled
fear of and a willingness to be segregated from their Islamic surroundings.
segregated communities
No single elite group sectarianized Mount Lebanon, but each contributed
to the dismantling of the moral and material foundations of the old regime.
Under the historical, geographical, and cultural recasting of Mount
Lebanon as a quintessentially sectarian land lay an unresolved crisis. The
traditional elite community of knowledge that had bound chroniclers,
clergy, and notables of different faiths together in a nonsectarian politics
during the old regime had disintegrated under the pressures of reform and
was in the process of being reconstituted as separate sectarian communities
of knowledge. The entrance of Europeans as players in elite politics; rival
Druze and Maronite interpretations of the meaning of legitimacy, tradi-
tion, and reform; and missionary encroachment dramatically altered the
relationship among religion, knowledge, and power. Whereas religion had
once been an integral part of an elaborate nonsectarian social order de-
pendent on a notion of absolute and everlasting Ottoman sovereignty, it
now constituted the basis and raison d’être for communal segregation in an
era of profound change. Paralleling the two geographical districts that di-
vided Mount Lebanon were opposing Druze and Maronite reflections of a
putative past—and what morals and lessons should be drawn from it—
and mutually exclusive visions of a sectarian future. Reform had come to
Mount Lebanon Janus-faced. One side looked backward to survey the al-
legedly primordial scene, while the other side looked forward to shape a di-
verse land into a tragic place of atavistic hatreds and primordial religious
solidarities.
There were some notable victories for sectarian modernity. By 1860, for
example, Riccadonna believed he had made local Christians worthy again
of that name, for he had stopped (some) Christians from singing “Muslim”
songs.92 By 1860, missionaries had done much to transform previously
“unrecognizable” Christian women into discernibly “modest” Chris-
tians.93 Father François Badour had even noted in 1855 that new Catholics
were being born in the Levant, at once loyal to France and able to withstand
the “pernicious influences of the community of infidels with whom they
are mixed.”94 But from other vantage points anxieties snapped at the heels
of these victories. The breakdown of the old regime had opened a Pandora’s


[PDF page 113]
Reinventing Mount Lebanon / 95
box of possibilities regarding the political and social makeup of each com-
munity. Rival elites—the Maronite Church, secular Christian and Druze
notables, Jesuits, European and Ottoman officials—struggled to impose
their respective visions of a sectarian Mount Lebanon. They tried to pre-
serve the social hierarchy of the old regime while they undermined its ma-
terial and metaphorical foundations. They insisted that their religious
communities were autonomous political and cultural nations and not sim-
ply communities of faith integrated into a complex intrareligious polity.
Never for a moment did the disparate elites contemplate the full rami-
fications of reconfiguring each ta’ifa as a nation. Their grim determina-
tion not to relinquish any power and their successful efforts to block
cadastral reform in the late 1840s notwithstanding, at times it seemed that
notables like Khattar al-‘Imad, whom we came across earlier in this chap-
ter, were beginning to make out a terrible apparition largely of their own
making.95 As we shall see in the next chapter, one unintended result of the
elite debate over reform was the theoretical possibility of a subaltern ahali
who would forcibly stake out a role in politics and claim a place in a sec-
tarian landscape. Fear and rejection of this possibility increasingly bur-
dened and complicated elite narratives and rivalries up to and including
1860. The rupture in the cohesiveness of the traditional politics of nota-
bility and the introduction of communally articulated reform muddled the
status of the ahali. ‘Imad’s supplication to the Ottoman government
summed up the conundrum. He claimed the Christian villagers in his dis-
trict “were once our miserable and wretched subjects.” Left hanging, how-
ever, was a palpable concern. What were they to become now? In other
words, what was the place of the ahali in an emerging sectarian world?
How was the Ottoman government to reconcile its secular intent with the
renewed emphasis in Mount Lebanon on sectarian affiliations? And did
the Tanzimat imply social as well as religious equality? Precisely because
no single party had a monopoly on interpretation in the era of reform,
there was no way of answering these questions categorically or uniformly.
In a period of dominance without hegemony, to borrow Ranajit Guha’s
formulation, the door was unwittingly left open for the uncontrolled en-
trance of the ahali onto the sectarian political stage.96 And as we shall
presently see, there was a commoner daring enough to walk through it.
The rise of Tanyus Shahin embodied a popular sectarian invasion of what
had once been the strictly elite realm of politics. This muleteer from Ray-
fun represented the most radical attempt to redefine the relationship be-
tween power and knowledge in the history of Mount Lebanon. In so doing,
he unleashed a sustained terror among the elites.
