[PDF page 114]
6 The Return of the Juhhal
We beg to remind you that to support or abandon us is supporting
or abandoning all the Christians in the Lebanon, not because we
are of so much importance in the world but because when the
disorderly in the mountain [see] that crimes such as those
committed by the people of our district pass unpunished the
disorders [extend] to most of the mountains.
Memorial from the Khazin shaykhs to British Consul
Noel Moore, 25 December 1859 (FO 78/1454)
A
crisis of communal representation unfolded in Mount Lebanon. This
crisis originated in the tumult of the restoration period but came to the
fore most dramatically during a popular revolt in the predominantly Mar-
onite district of Kisrawan in 1858 and in the Druze-Maronite war of 1860.
At stake, as the above plea of the Maronite Khazin shaykhs to the British
consul-general illustrates, was a struggle over the meaning of community
and geography in the postpartition world. It was a struggle epitomized by
the social unrest that invaded and undermined elite politics. For while Ot-
tomans, Europeans, and local Druze and Maronite leaders engaged in ne-
gotiations premised on the idea of an age-old sectarian reality and on im-
mutable sectarian identities, while Jesuit missionaries persisted in their
gentle crusade and S¸ ekib Efendi’s unwieldy regulations sought to reconsti-
tute an elite sectarian social order, a movement was afoot in the villages of
Kisrawan that forced open the closed circle of Ottoman politics.
In 1858 common Maronite villagers took advantage of a debilitating
feud between Maronite notables to press for a reform of the social order.
The insurgents were galvanized by the Tanzimat, the ample amounts of
weaponry available since the 1840s, a climate of economic hardship, and
scarcity of land.1 Their initial grievances were formulated against what
they claimed were the excessive and unjust taxes and humiliating gifts
they were traditionally compelled to present to the Khazin shaykhs. In De-
cember of 1858, a muleteer from Rayfun by the name of Tanyus Shahin
took over the leadership of the rebellion. Under his direction, the revolt es-
calated despite Maronite Church efforts to mediate between shaykhs and
commoners. Villagers demanded equality with the shaykhs and formal
96


[PDF page 115]
The Return of the Juhhal / 97
representation. They took the unprecedented action of evicting the Khazin
notables from their homes and from the district that had in bygone years
“belonged” to them.2 Shahin’s popularity spread to neighboring districts as
he presented himself and was perceived as a savior of the common Chris-
tian inhabitants of Mount Lebanon, especially after a Druze-Maronite
clash in August 1859 in the village of Bayt Miri. By 1860, Shahin was in de
facto control of most of Kisrawan, defying Ottoman efforts to silence him.
Rebellions, of course, had occurred in the past and were a feature of the
political landscape of nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon. But these
events were different, not so much because of their scope but because of
their location and timing. Not only was the Kisrawan uprising played out
in an almost exclusively Maronite district—and hence contrary to the
logic of partition—but it occurred after the promulgation of the second
major reform decree of the Tanzimat, the 1856 Hatt-i Hümayun.3 The
rebel villagers consistently justified their actions by referring to the Tan-
zimat; they drew in equal measure on notions of imperial reform as well
as on a discourse of just and unjust traditions. As a result, the Kisrawan
uprising represented a fundamental crisis in local and Ottoman identity. It
explicitly challenged elite conceptions of a quietist Maronite identity in
postrestoration Mount Lebanon, and, implicitly, it raised vital questions
about the meaning of modern post-Tanzimat Ottoman subjecthood. The
movement in Kisrawan exploited the open-ended nature of sectarian poli-
tics, which could not be contained within the closed narratives produced
about it— either textually as in the case of Bishop Nicolas Murad’s Notice
historique or legally through S¸ ekib Efendi’s double kaymakamate system.
Shahin and his followers imposed a popular Christian reading on what
was traditionally a genealogical geography; they asserted new rights of
freedom and equality, and, above all, they represented themselves rather
than allowed themselves to be represented.4 This will to knowledge on the
part of the Christian juhhal—the “ignorants,” which is the epithet the
elites bestowed on them for their insubordination—indicated a world en-
veloped in momentous change, when order was no longer defined in terms
of master and slave, when hierarchy was violated, and when the members
of the ahali deliberately and autonomously sought to carve out their own
place in the modern world and to enter the realm of traditionally elite pol-
itics.5
This chapter tells the story of the most sustained popular mobilization
in nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon, recognizing from the outset that it
is implicated in another tale of the unfolding of the Tanzimat. I begin with
a discussion of a crisis in local representation that was sparked by the revolt


[PDF page 116]
98 / The Return of the Juhhal
by examining rebel demands and the Khazin reaction to the rebellion.
Then I elaborate on the implications of Shahin’s movement for modern Ot-
toman subjecthood (and citizenship) by analyzing Ottoman responses to
the rebellion. My main purpose is to depict what I see as the overlapping
social and religious layers and the limits inherent in modern sectarian
identity.
the crisis in local representation
While Murad was musing over the essential characteristics of the Maro-
nite “nation,” in Kisrawan—heartland of the Maronites of Mount
Lebanon—the very notion of who could speak for the Maronites was sub-
ject to an intense struggle between the Khazins, who insisted that they
ruled and thus represented Kisrawan, and Shahin and his followers, who
presented the justness of their cause in terms of popular and general inter-
ests and rights in Kisrawan. The sheer audacity of the rebellious ahali of
Kisrawan both in their rebellion against their notables in 1858 and in the
expulsion of the majority of the Khazin family in January of 1859, esti-
mated by several sources to number several hundred individuals, reverber-
ated across the elite community of Mount Lebanon.6 Never before had the
commoners acted with such decided “ignorance”; never before had a no-
table family been uprooted by the ahali. The uprising came on the heels of
a simmering dispute between the Christian kaymakam Bashir Ahmad
(from the Abilam‘ family) and several of the Khazin notables because they
refused to recognize his authority over them in the Kisrawan. In addition,
the situation was complicated by intense rivalries between various
branches of the Khazin family, rivalries that were finally resolved in De-
cember of 1858, when the family “united” in the face of the threat from
the juhhal.7 At first, each notable faction assumed that the other was incit-
ing the ahali to harass it; indeed, it seemed to be yet another episode of the
familiar tale of elite rivalries, in which each side mobilized its men and
reined them in or let them loose depending on the circumstances.
Far from being an organized and centrally directed rebellion run by the
bishops to weaken the power of the secular notability, the resistance to
Khazin domination took a more local and sporadic form. The epicenter of
the revolt was five villages in southern Kisrawan: Rayfun (Shahin’s own
village), ‘Ajaltun, ‘Ashqut, al-Qlay‘at, and Mazra‘at Kfar Dabyan. The rep-
resentatives of these villages tried to rally, through civil and coercive
means alike, recalcitrant villages to an imagined community of villagers
united in voice and deed. Other villages, however, such as ‘Aramun, hesi-


[PDF page 117]
The Return of the Juhhal / 99
tated or simply refused to join the Kisrawan uprising. Ghazir, stronghold
of the Hubaysh notable family, condemned the attacks on one of their
shaykhs by insisting that “crimes against the shaykh is not only directed
against him but against all of Ghazir.”8 The village notables in Ftuh as-
sured their Dahdah shaykhs that they were completely against Tanyus
Shahin’s call for a general uprising.9 Places like Ghusta remained staunchly
pro-Khazin, a state of affairs denounced by Shahin, who remarked in a let-
ter to the ahali of Zuq Mikayil that “from the beginning of the haraka
[movement] no result has come from Ghusta.”10 Unquestionably some re-
gions participated more actively in the rebellion than others. By the mid-
dle of 1859, Tanyus Shahin enjoyed de facto control over most of Kisrawan
and was addressed by rebel partisans as the “general representative of all
Kisrawan.”11
In most cases reported by the Khazins, either their trees were cut down
or their harvests were appropriated or their homes were looted. Apart
from the mass expulsion in January 1859, beatings of Khazin and other
notables seemed to occur at random intervals. A Hubaysh shaykh was in
his house in a village near Ghazir in May of 1860 when several men at-
tacked him; he fled, but the rebels stole his gun and went about “from
place to place” cursing and threatening the notable’s sharecroppers. A Dah-
dah shaykh was beaten and cursed on his way to Ghazir in the same
month, and he was lucky to escape with some of his clothing intact.12 The
wife of Khalil Khazin was often prevented from moving about freely and
was insulted when she did, according to a report from January of 1860.13
The only confirmed deaths that occurred in the revolt took place at ‘Ajal-
tun on the evening of 13 July 1859 in murky circumstances. There, the
wife and daughter of a Khazin shaykh were killed in their house. Their
murderers were never found, but the Patriarch was appalled by the “hor-
rific crime.”14
These and other assaults occurred throughout 1859 and 1860. The only
common strand was that attacks were generally quick affairs, in which vil-
lagers took advantage of the relative weakness or absence of the notables;
the point was to act under cover of night or through the collective anger of
an “ignorant” mob, and then to deny any involvement.15 Because the in-
surgent villagers could never be certain when the shaykhs would return,
houses were not occupied but were looted. The booty was, in some cases at
least, taken to Shahin’s own house “by virtue of the authority of the popu-
lace” and from there distributed to his followers.16 Fields were used by
shepherds to graze their flocks, and orchards stood unattended. One
Khazin shaykh bitterly complained to the Patriarch that anybody could


[PDF page 118]
100 / The Return of the Juhhal
“come and pick the berries and leaves as he pleased” and that his silk fac-
tory had been stripped to its very boards.17 Another Khazin shaykh, sur-
veying his ruined domain following the uprising, penned a long list of the
items stolen: silver objects and valuables such as crystal and porcelain as
well as hunting paraphernalia, local and European gunpowder, pistols, and
a game bag. Also carried off were his pipe, harnesses, a coffee grinder and
roaster, various silks and grains, and his great bed. His house was even
stripped of its doors; all that could not be carried away was broken.18
When the Patriarch insisted that the ahali return the bounties of stolen
harvests, the ahali simply denied taking anything and stated repeatedly that
the shaykhs were welcome to return to their homes.19 Similarly, villagers
denied to an Ottoman commission of inquiry sent to investigate the distur-
bances in Kisrawan all knowledge of the murderers and any involvement in
the plunder of the shaykhs’ houses. They claimed that neither the shaykhs
nor the government had appointed the ahali to watch over the houses. Be-
sides, they asserted that to the best of their knowledge the shaykhs had
cleaned out their homes before they left. As for stolen harvests, the ahali in-
sisted that the Khazins had taken a share of them. and the rest was with the
sharecroppers who had outstanding accounts with their notables. So the
government officials went from village to village across the Kisrawan. In all
they received the same answers—no knowledge of the murderers, plun-
dered goods, or stolen harvests.20 In another letter to the Patriarch in Janu-
ary of 1860, the insurgents again denied that they were rebels, adding only
that they demanded the rule of law as stipulated by the Tanzimat but that,
given the circumstances of their dispute with the Khazins, it was to be ex-
pected that “some indecencies” might occur at the behest of the “jahala.”
Ignorance, both in the sense of submitting to the wisdom of government (as
well as the Maronite Patriarch and the French consul) and in the sense of
manipulating a well-established trope of the “ignorant” commoner, pro-
vided a convenient cover for insubordinate villagers to ignore the govern-
ment’s intrusive questioning. The Khazins remained frustrated in their at-
tempts to restore the old regime.21
If the actions of some of the ahali were thus more sporadic than
planned, the demands they put forward on several occasions indicated that
they had in mind more than just looting.22 In one petition submitted to the
Maronite Church, rebel villagers insisted that the Khazins indemnify them
for all the costs incurred during the rebellion. They called for an abolition
of all “gifts” required of the ahali.23 In another list of demands, villagers
pressed for an end to the marriage taxes levied by the Khazins, the beating
of the ahali, and the practice of passing the taxes due from the shaykhs on


[PDF page 119]
The Return of the Juhhal / 101
to the ahali. They also called for compensation for all taxes that had been
thus extorted from the ahali as well as for an end to the encroachment on
the “common grazing lands” in the Jurud of Kisrawan. They also asked for
compensation for money taken for a cadastral survey that was never car-
ried out and for the disbursement of money promised but never delivered
to the “army of ahali Kisrawan” during the 1840 war against the Egyp-
tians.24
The villagers made repeated references to the idea of representation, so-
cial equality, and the Tanzimat. Representation was, of course, central to
S¸ ekib Efendi’s regulations, but it had not been introduced in Kisrawan be-
cause it was not a “mixed” district. According to one petition submitted for
the Church’s arbitration, the ahali of some rebel villages asked that dis-
putes between the ahali and the Khazins henceforth be settled by two wak-
ils, one elected by the Khazins and the other by the ahali. They subse-
quently demanded, however, that “the station [manzalat] of the shaykhs
be [equal] to ours without exception” and added that “nobody from the
shaykhs will be an official over us.”25 Rebels from other villages asked for
wakils “to defend the rights of the poor ahali who were not capable of de-
fending themselves.”26
Such evidence suggests that rebel villagers not only were willing to in-
voke tradition and the Tanzimat interchangeably but were quite able to in-
terpret them in accordance with their own goals. S¸ ekib Efendi had never
countenanced a wakil system that was an integral part of an essentially
popular rule, and he certainly would never have accepted Tanyus Shahin’s
election as general representative of Kisrawan or the appointment of wak-
ils by each of the rebel villages. Nor had the Tanzimat statesmen ever in-
tended to make all subjects of the empire socially equal. But that is pre-
cisely what the rebels demanded; in one petition they reminded the
Patriarch that the Tanzimat had stipulated “general equality and total
freedom” and had abolished “distinctions and disdain in the forms of ad-
dress.”27 Not only had the material foundations of the old regime been dis-
rupted by the rebels’ refusal to tolerate what they considered to be unjust
taxes and customs, but the ideological and symbolic bases of traditional so-
ciety had also been undermined by the rebels’ eviction of the Khazins from
their properties. The French consul, to give another example, was aghast at
the reports he received that at some of their “riots” the rebels had hoisted
French flags to indicate the support they believed they enjoyed from the
French consul.28 As far back as 1657, the name of France had been symbol-
ically associated with the Khazin family, who had served France as consuls
until just before the French Revolution. Shahin— or some of his followers


[PDF page 120]
102 / The Return of the Juhhal
who hoisted French flags—apparently understood this and in unfurling
the French flag not only invoked a spurious French support but implicitly
challenged the Khazins’ historical connection to France.
Implacably opposed to such ideas, of course, stood the Khazins, who
consistently referred to the rebellion as an “excitement” rather than as a
rational movement. To them rights meant “keeping property in the hands
of its owner.”29 Although at the outset of the rebellion in 1858 the Khazins
reacted slowly and were divided among themselves, they quickly formu-
lated as their basic demand the return of their “usurped” property.30 Their
increasingly wretched condition, their mounting debts while exiled from
their lands, and their inability to force the ahali into submission did not
shake their belief that they had been cheated and robbed of their
birthright. The property was theirs after all; their function as tax collectors
had been reaffirmed by S¸ ekib’s regulations. The right to property—and
with it the confirmation of social hierarchy—was far more important to
them than the nebulous Tanzimat right to equity of treatment; to be fair,
nothing in the history of the past few decades had indicated to them that
their stand against the juhhal was not the one sanctioned by the Great
Powers or the Ottoman government. For the Khazins as well as the Maro-
nite Church, the defiance of the ahali had to be the result of an ignorance
manipulated by a few conspirators. Such places as Rayfun and ‘Ajaltun,
villages which had “belonged” to them as far back as any could remember,
seemed to the Khazins to be the center of the “excitement” of the ignorant
ahali, who refused to recognize the limits sanctioned by tradition, history,
and law.
The Khazins reasoned that the ahali acted out of their juhl, or igno-
rance. This ignorance was, in their opinion, being manipulated by some
more important force, something or someone who was perched higher on
the social hierarchy. Some of the Khazins blamed the Maronite bishops,
for it was reported to the Maronite Patriarch that the Khazins believed that
“the ahali don’t do anything without your order.”31 The Patriarch received
a report that Qa‘dan Bek Khazin had told an assembly of Druze and Chris-
tian notables in the fall of 1859 that the revolt came not from the ahali but
at the instigation of the Patriarch and the Maronite bishop of Beirut,
Tubiyya ‘Awn. The report added that Qa‘dan Bek insisted that, had he not
been restrained by his relatives, he would have “split open the brains of the
Patriarch.” Had he been allowed to do so, he continued, “we would have all
been spared these actions [by the ahali].”32 Although several of the Khazin
shaykhs swore that they had never blamed the Patriarch and that any dec-
larations to that effect with their seals on them were forgeries, the inabil-


[PDF page 121]
The Return of the Juhhal / 103
ity of the Khazins to accept the autonomy of popular mobilization was in-
dicated by their search for conspirators of “[evil] intentions.”33 The confu-
sion was compounded because the rebels often invoked the name of the Pa-
triarch to justify their actions.
For the Maronite Church, the Kisrawan revolt could not have come at a
more awkward moment. In 1858, Patriarch Bulus Mas‘ad had convened a
Maronite council at Bkirke in an effort to lay the moral, spiritual, and ed-
ucational basis for a modern Maronite clergy and community.34 Therefore,
as the Church was positioning itself as the sole representative of the Mar-
onite “nation”—as it was deliberately cultivating a self-consciously mod-
ern image—it was paralyzed by a popular movement that, according to an
advisor to the Patriarch, threatened the ta’ifa with “destruction.”35 The
Patriarch’s role as a spiritual guide and as a moral arbitrator in the troubled
times of the mid-nineteenth century was inherently compromised by the
fact that the Maronite Church was among the largest landowners in
Mount Lebanon and was therefore committed to the inviolability of prop-
erty. As an institution, it was also a staunch supporter of social hierarchy,
and in no manner did it condone the individual activities of some village
clergy who actively participated in the uprising.36 Not only were several
Khazins members of the Church establishment, but the movement of the
juhhal threatened to weaken the “common cause” of the Christians. The
Patriarch repeatedly exhorted the ahali, as he did in a letter to the (Maro-
nite) ahali of Baskinta in May of 1860, “to adhere to the spirit of peace and
tranquility, to avoid all contrary causes, and to remain in the good graces of
the emirs [fi khatir al-umara’].”37 At the same time, the Maronite Patri-
arch worked to end the rebellion by addressing at least some of the princi-
pal rebel demands. For instance, an undated draft reconciliation found in
the Patriarchal papers proposed that each village was to have its own wak-
ils elected by the ahali. It stated that the shaykhs were not to have the right
to “compel, insult or beat” any of the ahali; if they did, the incident would
have to be investigated in accordance with the imperial reform edicts.
Moreover, “just as the ahali were asked to respect the dignity of the
shaykhs and to show them the respect emanating from their standing,” it
was also asked of the shaykhs to respect the rights of the ahali, to abolish
the old humiliations, both those in writing and in greeting, and to stop ad-
dressing any of the respectable ahali as a fellah, or peasant.38
While all sides referred to the Patriarch as the ultimate recourse for set-
tling disputes, several competing visions of the rights he was meant to pro-
tect emerged. Shahin and the ahali urged him to remain faithful to the ma-
jority of his flock—at one point even firing shots toward Bkirke, where


[PDF page 122]
104 / The Return of the Juhhal
some Khazin notables took refuge. The Khazins urged the Patriarch to re-
main constant to his duties toward a family that had long supported the
Maronite Church. His bishops pleaded with him to take a firm stand to
unite the Maronites. But the Patriarch hesitated, unable to control the sit-
uation on the ground and the pace of events. He always urged “calm” but
was unable to bridge the contradiction between the old-regime social or-
der, on the one hand, and the Tanzimat discourse of rights and a commu-
nal identity on the other.
At stake in Kisrawan was more than a simple physical struggle over
control of land. There was a contest to redefine the term ahali, a well-em-
bedded trope in old-regime chronicles. A single, undifferentiated category
of the ahali was, after all, a construction of old-regime chronicles; it was a
source of legitimacy for those rulers who guaranteed the tranquillity of the
common people and who maintained a stable social order. For the Khazins,
the Maronite Church, and the Ottoman state, therefore, the term ahali
implied the ideal of a politically quiescent population; it intimated a passive
community whose legitimate and lawful needs (about which there was no
consensus) were represented by others. They deployed the trope of the
passive and obedient ahali primarily to isolate and delegitimize the rebels,
whom they accused of being at the forefront of a conspiracy whose goal
was to overturn the order of things and to instigate the innate “ignorance”
of the commoner class. At the most basic level, this accusation reflected
elite unease in the face of a genuinely popular movement, an inability to
comprehend that the meaning of ahali was itself bound to change follow-
ing the Tanzimat, and a refusal to accept the idea that commoners had a
stake in the making and interpretation of history or that they could partic-
ipate in rational rule or government. The Khazin shaykhs explained to the
sympathetic British consul-general that, as a rule, “when a people, who are
by nature inclined toward sedition, desire to be given free rein in every vil-
lage or place [and] are permitted [such freedom], they are [inevitably go-
ing to] commit terrible crimes.”39 Shahin, appropriating the mantle of re-
form, pushed for an alternative understanding of the ahali. For Shahin and
the rebels under his command, the term ahali signified an active, unified,
discerning, and mobilized population willing and able to legitimately rep-
resent itself. Shahin often signed documents as a “general representative”
(wakil ‘am) of the ahali of Kisrawan. Many petitions forwarded by the
rebels to the Patriarch were often simply signed by “ahali Kisrawan.”
When Shahin was called on by the Patriarch to settle the dispute with the
Khazins in March of 1859, he replied that “we cannot accept anything un-
til we consult with all the ahali and all the villages.”40 In another letter to


[PDF page 123]
The Return of the Juhhal / 105
a priest, Shahin replied that he was bound to “the interest of the masses
[maslahat al-jumhur].”41 That many villages refused to join the rebel-
lion—that Ghazir, Ghusta and the villages of Ftuh remained staunchly
loyal to their shaykhs— did not deflect from the fact that a subaltern
movement now claimed to speak for all and, in so doing, impinged on the
coherence of an elite Maronite identity peddled by Bishop Murad in front
of the European powers. That there was a movement at all, that Maronite
villages organized, delegated representatives, set up tribunals, evicted
landlords, distributed harvests and provisions all in the name of the com-
mon people and without direction from the Maronite Church, was crisis
enough.
the crisis in ottoman representation
The inter-Maronite battle in Kisrawan not only eroded the coherence of
sectarian narratives proposed by the various elites but also reflected a
struggle to define the contours of the Tanzimat in Mount Lebanon. The re-
volt had important implications for the definition of modern Ottoman sub-
jecthood because both the Khazins and Shahin insisted that they were loyal
Ottoman servants interested in promoting rights guaranteed them by the
Tanzimat. Shahin underscored a crisis in Ottoman representation because
he linked religion and reform in a manner that turned an imperial project
of reform on its head. The Sultan and his reforming ministers assumed
that the traditional social order—the separation of high and low, elite and
nonelite—would remain unchanged by reform. Indeed Ottoman officials
saw that the right to religious equality in a modernizing empire was possi-
ble and desirable only if all subjects maintained their hudud, or station in
life. It never occurred to the reformers that the upheavals of reform would
provide for a subaltern understanding of the Tanzimat. Shahin’s insistence
that the Tanzimat mandated equality within as well as between religious
communities contradicted an imperial Ottoman understanding of the Tan-
zimat as a socially conservative project of secular modernization. The anx-
iety of the Ottomans in the face of Shahin’s rebellion was magnified by the
fact that Kisrawan was a rural region of a hitherto insignificant hinterland
which had occupied, at best, a marginal place in Ottoman imperial imagi-
nation. How could a villager from Kisrawan—and an allegedly illiterate
Arabic-speaking muleteer to boot—represent the Tanzimat? And by
whose authority did he rebel? Was he an Ottoman? Imperial officials an-
swered these questions in the language of the old regime. Their categori-
cally negative answers reflected their inability, indeed their refusal, to


[PDF page 124]
106 / The Return of the Juhhal
comprehend the manifold consequences of the Tanzimat, one of which was
the rise of Tanyus Shahin.
The Ottoman government was neither directly nor indirectly support-
ive of the Kisrawan revolt.42 The governor of Sayda, Hurs¸id Pasha, never
for a moment doubted that a restoration of order was the highest priority.
His sympathies were inclined toward the Khazins, but his powerlessness
and lack of money, far more than his duty to ensure justice for all subjects,
steered him in a more equitable direction. Despite the historiographical
myth put forward by many historians of Lebanon and by European chron-
iclers that Hurs¸id was “behind” (or at least tacitly supported) the uprising
to weaken a putative Lebanese solidarity, all evidence points to the fact that
he was a man constrained from pacifying the region by the European in-
sistence that he not send Ottoman troops into Kisrawan.43
The Ottoman attitude toward the Kisrawan uprising was dominated by
a desire to contain the unrest and restore the social order while maintain-
ing the myth of sultanic benevolence for all subjects. Hurs¸id wrote to the
Patriarch complaining of the “leaders of sedition [ru’asa al-fasad]” who
were behind the uprising; he accused them of manipulating the “minds of
the simple ones [‘uqul al-sadhijin]”—that is to say, the minds of the ahali
who were in rebellion against Khazin domination. Hurs¸id’s polemic against
Tanyus Shahin centered around his accusation that Shahin used “deceit to
lead astray the minds of the people and to seduce them into following his
evil ways” by playing on their religious sentiments and claiming the Patri-
arch’s support. Hurs¸id urged the Patriarch to use his considerable spiritual
authority to reclaim the minds of the ignorant ahali.44 The insistence of
the Ottoman governor on the simple folk– evil conspirator theme was not
fortuitous. Like the discourse of juhhal employed by the Khazins, the idea
was to invoke a basic and constant loyalty of the ahali to the Ottoman gov-
ernment’s rigid social order, which was manipulated by Shahin’s clever
ploys.
Silencing Shahin, the logic of government went, would restore the ahali
to their senses—a sentiment echoed by the Khazins and the Maronite
Church; the implication, of course, was that, at bottom, the social order
was not in crisis.45 The Ottoman government rarely uttered Shahin’s
name, preferring to label him the “leader of corruption and sedition.”
When Hurs¸id Pasha sent Emir Yusuf ‘Ali Murad, a Maronite notable from
the Abilam‘ family, to discipline the rebels, Shahin informed the emir that
“the Christians of Bilad Jbayl have united with the ahali of Kisrawan” and
warned him not to intervene in the affairs of the Christians of Jbayl, “as
you may be aware that all the Christians of Syria have made common cause


[PDF page 125]
The Return of the Juhhal / 107
just as you have united with the Druzes, the shaykhs, the muqata‘jis in all
areas as is evident by the compacts you have stamped with your seals, your
objective being to subjugate [qahr] the Christians after we achieved our
[freedom?].” Shahin continued his accusations, saying that “all your ac-
tions have become common knowledge,” including an attack by “your rel-
atives the Druzes” on a monastery. “Return without delay, for if you do
not, we will not be held responsible. . . . Do not remain even an hour
longer.” In a postscript to this same letter, which he signed as “the general
representative of the Christians,” Shahin declared:
Because you are Christian, and because your intentions [are in alliance
with] the Druzes, we are warning you without haughtiness: if you desire
[to fight], we are more eager than you, and we are not afraid, because the
death of a youth in his prime is like his wedding. . . . Return without
[causing] treachery like the ahali of Baskinta, and stay dignified without
becoming a laughingstock, because nobody will respect the stature of he
who does not maintain his station. Because you are a man of knowledge,
there is no need to be any clearer, because our warning deserves some at-
tention, for he who makes you laugh, makes you cry and he who makes
you cry, makes you laugh. If you say that emirs are not written to in this
manner, it still serves you better than other [means] because writing can
46
be concealed, but what do you do to someone who curses you openly?
Such an astounding warning only added to the general anxiety among
the elites, especially among the Maronite Patriarch, the Christian kay-
makam, and the Ottoman government. It represented a reversal of estab-
lished hierarchy and discourse, as a muleteer was now addressing an emir
with impudence, respecting the forms of neither letter writing nor lan-
guage. The letter began with the ritual honorific “after kissing your noble
hands,” which implied respect for tradition and hierarchy. However, as is
obvious from the rest of the letter, which is written in common dialect,
Shahin neither would kiss the hands of a “traitor” who had sided with the
Druzes nor would allow Emir Yusuf ‘Ali’s “plans” to bear fruit. Beyond the
mere insults and threats, it was Shahin’s claim to knowledge that infuriated
the elites—and removed him, in their eyes, from the level of the “igno-
rant” ahali into the realm of shadowy cunning conspirators.
Shahin spoke with the authority of a man who knew he had the support,
or at least the intimidated consent, of most of the ahali of Kisrawan. He
spoke of love of religion, which no Christian emir and certainly not the Pa-
triarch could dismiss out of hand. Shahin deployed a religious discourse to
galvanize support for the uprising and defend its achievements in the face
of the elitist counterreaction. By presenting the betrayal of the Christian


[PDF page 126]
108 / The Return of the Juhhal
elites in religious terms and equating it with sin, Shahin justified his own
course of sedition. In another letter to Emir Yusuf ‘Ali Murad’s adjunct,
one Yazbak Lahud, Shahin repeated his threats against the elites “who de-
sired to make war on those who have joined with the ahali of Kisrawan, be-
cause all the Christians are joined in common cause.” Shahin could not re-
sist adding that “you deserve to be humiliated in writing and otherwise for
your actions. Return to your religion and stand united. Where do you get
the right to abandon your religion of Christianity without opprobrium?
Religion can not be sold for money; [besides] you are not needy [and thus
do not need] to pursue this course that satisfies nobody.”47 Here, then, was
a popular voice, disquieting both in its lack of refinement and in its re-
course to a populist, religious-based knowledge. Shahin posed an obvious
challenge to the Ottoman state by claiming to know, to interpret, and,
above all, to act in defense of certain rights to which he felt entitled because
he was Christian. For Shahin to be a modern Ottoman subject was to be a
sectarian subject. And, yet, Shahin posed an enormous challenge for the
entire elite sectarian system because he equated a religious Christian dis-
course of freedom with a social discourse of equality.
the layers of sectarian identity
Shahin’s reliance on sectarian language has been variously interpreted in
the historiography of Kisrawan as a diversion or corruption of a class
struggle into a religious struggle—the idea being, of course, that sectarian
struggle is necessarily less legitimate than class struggle and indeed is con-
tradictory to it.48 Such history, however, overlooks the fact that the popu-
lar movement and the opposition to it were from the outset informed by a
religious discourse. The battle between the Khazins and Shahin to appro-
priate the name of the Patriarch—through the various appeals to the Pa-
triarch as well as through actions said to have the Patriarch’s blessing—
was symptomatic of this struggle to define a quiescent or mobilized
sectarian identity. But it went far beyond this struggle, for the issue was
one of survival in a postpartition world. Both sides insisted that their re-
spective position guaranteed a viable Christian community; both sides in-
variably conflated Maronite with Christian; and both insisted that their
opponents doomed it to destruction. From the beginning of the rebellion,
the relationship between communal identity and a stable social order de-
fined the problem at hand. For the Khazins, the survival of Christianity in
Mount Lebanon was tied to a suppression of what they considered the or-


[PDF page 127]
The Return of the Juhhal / 109
chestrated events of Kisrawan. Their wretched fate, they warned the
British consul, foreshadowed the fate of the region’s Christian inhabitants,
for it was clear to them, as they explained separately to the Patriarch, that
a “foreign,” satanically inspired, non-Maronite conspiracy motivated the
“ignorant” villagers of Kisrawan.49 For Shahin and the rebels, however,
exactly the opposite was true. In repeated petitions to the Patriarch, the vil-
lagers claimed that they desired only to live in dignity with the Patriarch’s
blessing, free from corruption and intimidation, and in accordance with the
freedom guaranteed to them by the Tanzimat. Shahin went even further.
He asserted that “I have a boyoroldi [buyrultu, official Ottoman decree or
mandate] from the Seven Sovereigns . . . giving liberty to all Christians
[stating] that they are not to be in bondage to anyone; if you desire eman-
cipation from slavery, no one can prevent you, neither the mushir [a refer-
ence to Hurs¸id Pasha] nor the kaimakam.”50
To a certain degree, Shahin’s own background and religiosity facilitated
the task of the ahali to present a subversive “Christian” alternative to the
status quo. Born into poverty, Shahin nevertheless associated himself with
the Lazarist school in Rayfun and became a muleteer. He made use of his
contact with the Lazarists; they obtained for him credentials from the
French consulate in Beirut that allowed him to travel into cities, and he
kept close company with village priests.51 The documents that bear his seal
(and sometimes his signature) were probably written by clergymen sym-
pathetic to his cause.52 He was allegedly so devout that he prayed twice a
day and refused to eat meat except on Sundays and religious holidays.53
One of the surviving documents containing his seal is a letter to the clergy
of the village of ‘Aramun, in which he writes:
Then we inform Your Reverences what must already be known to you,
concerning the incidents that occur on festival days as a result of drink-
ing ‘araq and wine. The Council agreed that it was necessary to an-
nounce in all places that whoever drinks ‘araq or wine outside his house
and there results from it any mischief, unseemly talk, cursing or quar-
reling, etc. this is in itself a very vile thing. Then may God—be He ex-
alted!—the faithful of the Church, and the leaders all proclaim this. We
hope that Your Reverences will announce this in church to all the popu-
lace. Whoever transgresses after the announcement is made, and does
the slightest mischief, will be punished by one month’s [imprisonment]
or several times that much. We are sure that such things will not occur
from among your congregation, but since the announcement was to be
made in all places, it was necessary to inform Your Reverences and the
54
populace of it.


[PDF page 128]
110 / The Return of the Juhhal
Shahin derived his authority from a genuinely popular base, but he spread
it, at least in part, through the pulpits of Mount Lebanon. Even as he en-
acted new laws and drew up punishments—in the case of insalubrious be-
havior and disorderly conduct the rather arbitrary “one month’s imprison-
ment or several times that much”—by referring back to his subversive
authority, he nevertheless used established channels of communication,
such as Sunday sermons, to diffuse his message of a sober, Christian way
of life. In his mind at least, the survival of Christians was organically con-
nected to liberation from Khazin domination and, soon enough, from the
grip that the Druze landowners maintained over the Christians in the
mixed districts.
Shahin also tapped a wider Christian discourse when he went from call-
ing himself the “general representative of Kisrawan” to the “general rep-
resentative of the Christians.” The religiosity of the uprising present from
the beginning intensified when the popular rebellion reached beyond the
boundaries of Kisrawan into regions inhabited by Druzes, by Shi‘a, and by
other Christian sects. In May of 1859, for example, the Christian villagers
of Hammana (in the Matn district) refused to accept the authority of the
kaymakam, justifying their insubordination by pointing to the example of
Kisrawan. Bashir Ahmad had made the unpopular decision of “returning”
the village to a Druze notable family that had “traditional” claims to the
land. The Christian ahali immediately sent off appeals to the Patriarch and
to Hurs¸id pleading their case. It was, they said to the Ottoman governor,
“contrary to the Lebanese order and privileges that were granted to us by
the mercies of the Sublime Porte, as we are entirely Christian and the
aforementioned muqaddam is a Druze.”55 In an appeal to the Patriarch
they not only stated that the decision by Bashir Ahmad was against “the
regulations and privileges of Mount Lebanon granted to it [by the Sublime
Porte]” but wondered, “If the ahali of Ghazir who are of the same sect as
their shaykhs, and who have been ruled by them from time immemorial
. . . at present refuse to acknowledge or submit to the authority of any of
[their] shaykhs, how is it possible that a Druze ruler be imposed on us, who
are all Christian?”56
Soon, in other areas of Mount Lebanon, the religiosity of the Kisrawan
uprising began to become its most defining characteristic; it gave the
movement strength. Far from reducing Shahin’s status, it increased his
prestige as he began to wage campaigns against neighboring Shi‘a notables
and ordinary Shi‘a villagers, who suffered the brunt of these expeditions.
An undated letter written by a priest addressed Shahin as a bek [bey, an
Ottoman title for a notable] and informed him that a Christian from his


[PDF page 129]
The Return of the Juhhal / 111
village went to a Shi‘a village to “try and collect some money owed to him
by one Husayn Haydar and by ‘Ali Hasan ‘Abbas. They maltreated him
and beat him painfully.” The priest continued, “Since Your Excellency
asked after us when we had no complaints, now that we do have complaints
you must ask after us [again] and restrain the Mutawalis (Shi‘a) from us.
For the Creator gave you a strong voice with which to defend the rights of
all Christians and set our minds at rest. As for the Mutawalis, they are dis-
respectful of you. We hope to recover our rights [and indemnity for] the
beating.”57 In June of 1859, Shi‘a villagers in Jbayl protested the attacks
they were suffering at the hands of the “Maronite ahali of Kisrawan, Ftuh
and Bilad Jbayl,” which were led, they claimed, by Tanyus Shahin, who
plundered their property and waylaid hapless villagers on the main roads.
Some of the Shi‘a villagers were made to change “their religion” if they
wished to be spared. Such gross violations of social order, of course, in-
creased the contempt that elites reserved for Shahin and the “men of the
jumhuriyya [literally, republic],” but they bolstered Shahin’s reputation as
a defender of Christian rights.58 Many Maronite villagers claimed that
Shahin had, in fact, saved them “from the attacks of the Shi‘a on us.” They
interpreted any Ottoman attempt to arrest Shahin and, therefore, to
“break the cause of the Chrstians” to be the result of bribery on the part of
the Khazins.59
Sectarian imagery was very much tied to popular mobilization, in
which Shahin’s followers began to take on the task of “protecting” Chris-
tianity, even representing it, in light of the elite feuds that tore apart the
notion of the communal solidarity of Christians. In other words, the grow-
ing frustration of the elites with their combined inability to suppress
Shahin was contrasted with the increasing boldness of the ahali. These
rebels, the majority of whom remain anonymous, articulated—in sectar-
ian attacks against the Shi‘a villagers, in raids across the borders of
Kisrawan, in threats against quietist villages like Ghusta, in beatings of
Christian notables, in the expulsion of the Khazins, and in indirect defi-
ance of both Ottoman and Patriarchal orders of calm by turning the dis-
course of “ignorance” on its head—a populist communal vision of the role
of the Christian in postpartition Mount Lebanon. To them, Shahin was de-
fending the “rights” granted by the Tanzimat, in terms of both equity with
the notables and equality with the non-Muslims; he was to defend Chris-
tian villagers from the alleged depredations of non-Christians as much as
he was to ward off elitist attempts to pacify Kisrawan, especially after the
notables had “betrayed” the religion of the Christians as well as the spirit
of the Tanzimat.


[PDF page 130]
112 / The Return of the Juhhal
This “betrayal” became clearer in the eyes of the rebellious ahali fol-
lowing the Druze-Christian battle of Bayt Miri in August of 1859. This in-
tercommunal fracas, according to a report compiled by Bishop ‘Awn, began
with a “trivial” incident. A Druze, ‘Awn claimed, fought with a Christian
boy “on the road” and hit him. The Christian went home and told his fa-
ther what had happened. The father, rather impulsively, implies ‘Awn,
took two men with him and “took revenge” on the first Druze whom he
came across, who was not the man who had hit his son nor even from the
same family. When reports of this arbitrary beating were heard, a great
“commotion” occurred, as “both sides” prepared for hostilities; then “Iblis
[the Devil] played with the minds of the juhhal of both sides, and suddenly
the sedition began, with both sides firing shots on the other.”60 Nine
Christian men and one Christian woman were killed, and “it was said” that
thirty Druzes were slain. Fighting spread across the “mixed” villages of
the Matn district. The Maronite bishops and Druze religious leaders (by
‘Awn’s own admission) struggled to retain order there and castigated the
“ignorant” for their actions. ‘Awn even appealed to the Ottoman authori-
ties for help and promptly received it when they sent an expeditionary
force to separate the warring factions. The elites of both sides tried to
“calm” the situation by ordering the armed men to disband; in Ham-
mana—the same village that had seen the ahali reject the imposition of a
Druze notable over them just months before—“the respectable faces of
the Christians and Druzes of the Matn” jointly vowed to “prevent the ex-
tension of the movement.” ‘Awn concluded his report with the observation
that “although precaution and alertness against being double-crossed [by
the Druze notables] are necessary, it is our opinion . . . that those who are
wise from both sides [realize that fighting] will end in loss, destruction and
obliteration.”61
The atmosphere was so tense an American missionary residing in
Mount Lebanon remarked that “great excitement prevails yet throughout
the entire mountains. It is my expectation however, that there will be no
general war. There is no political motive, and all Emers [sic], Sheiks, and
influential men of both parties, are anxious to preserve peace. They have
everything to lose and nothing to gain by a war, and if there is a civil war,
it will be waged by the people without the concurrence of their
leaders.”62
This is exactly what worried ‘Awn even more than his fear of the Druzes.
The longer tension remained in the air, the less he was able to control the
ta’ifa. He warned ominously and rather cryptically, “Foreign hands are at
play, and our people are [endowed with] little perception and knowledge
and thus tend to the voice of the foreigner, doing away with that of their


[PDF page 131]
The Return of the Juhhal / 113
shepherd and guardian [ra‘ihi].” Moreover, he warned the Patriarch that
the government took a dim view of “our ta’ifa” because of the events of
Kisrawan.
Instead of the ordered and unified Maronite nation extolled by Bishop
Murad, ‘Awn sensed, much to his horror, a popular fury that was suppos-
edly being controlled by conspiratorial hands. His worries were com-
pounded because in their moment of fear and crisis, the ahali of Bayt Miri
turned to the hero of the Christian popular imagination, the bek Tanyus
Shahin. To him and to the other leaders of the shabab (young men) of
Kisrawan they appealed as “brothers” in distress surrounded by Druzes
who, in their view, had commenced hostilities. They asked Shahin to
“come quickly with a large jumhur so that if they desire evil we will be
ready with our own masses.”63 They appealed to Shahin in part because his
reputation had spread far beyond the borders of Kisrawan, in part because
he embodied the only hope of the Christian ahali overwhelmed by a fear
of their Druze neighbors.64
The appeal to Shahin was, if nothing else, a reflection of the growing
disillusionment with the efficacy of the local elites. While Shahin was pre-
senting himself in increasingly strident tones and with “Christian zeal,”
the notables tried, once more, to maintain their tenuous hold on the ahali
and on social order. In the aftermath of the Bayt Miri incident and the
fighting that engulfed the Matn district, Druze and Christian notables met
first in Hammana and then at Mdayrij (where Hurs¸id set up camp to over-
see the restoration of order) toward the end of August. Their meeting had
all the hallmarks of a declaration of a counterrevolution against the mobi-
lization of the ahali—both in Kisrawan and in the Matn. It represented
their attempt to contain once more the subaltern mobilization and to stifle
the ahali by reclaiming the representation of their respective ta’ifas. The
meeting was meant to end the years of bickering, infighting, and compet-
ing claims of compensation from the Ottoman authorities in Beirut. There
in Mdayrij in the Shuf, a stone’s throw from the Dahr al-Baydar mountain
pass, from whose vantage point the notables could survey their domains,
which were inhabited by the unruly ahali, a Druze landowner, shaykh
Husayn Talhuq, addressed the Christian notables with not a little impa-
tience, according to a report of the meeting sent to the Patriarch.65 The
most important reason for all the disturbances, he stressed to the gather-
ing of Mount Lebanon’s elites, was the fact that the Druze and Christian
notables and kaymakams had been unable to agree in the recent past; this
lack of agreement had “diminished from their station and caused the lack
of deference for them on the part of the ahali.” It had also, he continued,


[PDF page 132]
114 / The Return of the Juhhal
turning toward the notables from Kisrawan, brought about the demise of
the Khazins. Then shaykh Husayn stoped and asked each notable present,
one by one, Druze and Christian, whether their ahali respected their posi-
tions and rank. Each notable solemnly said no; shaykh Husayn proposed
that all the notables sign a compact to be “one hand.” They did. And they
agreed to march on Kisrawan to “discipline” the ahali.
Satisfied, the notables returned to their districts and, according to the
report, “exhibited an unusual determination to subdue the ahali” and be-
gan to prepare for the joint onslaught on Kisrawan to “return the Khazin
shaykhs by any means necessary” with the support of the Ottoman gov-
ernment. But before the march could begin, the insurgent ahali of
Kisrawan got word of the impending expedition; they too issued calls for
unity, and rumors spread about a compact of the Christian ahali to be “one
hand” and to defend their “common interest against any, grand or small,
who might infringe upon their rights.” The shaykhs of the Matn were sud-
denly seized with a fear that what had happened to the Khazins in
Kisrawan might happen to them. The expedition was aborted when it be-
came clear that the Christians of the Matn would not march on Kisrawan
under the notables.
On August 29 the ahali of Jbayl and Batrun agreed to be “one hand and
one mind” in opposition to any who might attack their jumhur.66 The
agreement stated that “this our compact is also to help our brothers the
Christians living in the other neighboring districts to the best of our abili-
ties.” It was also decided that in each village a wakil, or representative,
would be chosen by the ahali to tend to their “interests.” The wakil had to
be someone who worked not for his own private interests but for the in-
terests of the masses; he had to be “conscious” (mudrikan) of the “com-
mon welfare” (al-khayr al-‘am). In return the people had to listen to him
and to follow the common good just as the wakil was not to take any deci-
sion without first consulting with the ahali. Before making any decision
affecting the “common interests” of all, the wakils had to discuss the deci-
sion with each other. If ever a wakil was found to be “untrustworthy to
represent the interests of his village or the interests of the jumhur,” he
would be dismissed. “We ask God,” concluded the ahali signing the agree-
ment, “that this unity meets with His glory and [results in] the repose of
our jumhur.”67
The elitist countermovement of Mdayrij and the intercommunal Matn
clashes of the summer of 1859 did not weaken the resolve of the popular
mobilizations in Kisrawan; in fact, it gave them a general orientation that
extended beyond the immediate problems of particular villages with their


[PDF page 133]
The Return of the Juhhal / 115
traditional notables. The jumhur—in this context, the gathering of the
commoners—was aimed at defending their rights against both the Druzes
and the Christian notables, whom Shahin had disparagingly described as
the “relatives” of the Druzes. In the prereform society, this association be-
tween the elites of different sects had a positive connotation that reflected
the brotherhood of the notables in a hierarchical society in which power
was shared among the major families. But in the postrestoration society it
was increasingly becoming synonymous with betrayal. In part this change
in meaning stemmed from the memory of sectarian conflict in 1841; in
part, it reflected the overlap of social and sectarian interests in a parti-
tioned society that thrust Christian ahali under the rule of Druze notables
in the “mixed” districts of Mount Lebanon. In the main, however, it illus-
trated a popular participation in politics that conflated the defense of re-
form with the salvation of “the” Christian community. It shifted, in other
words, the basis of loyalty away from a notable family toward an imagined
political sectarian community.
Shahin’s uprising contested the notion of community and its leadership in
the post-Tanzimat era. The notion of a singular ahali, quiescent or mobi-
lized, was a figment of imagination, a rhetorical, political, and moral con-
struction that was deployed by both Shahin and the Khazins to legitimize
or delegitimize the Kisrawan rebellion. However, Shahin’s fiery Christian
rhetoric, his attacks on Shi‘a communities in and around Kisrawan, and his
call for the liberation of all Christians announced a popular sectarian vision
that, in essence, overturned the hierarchical social order. His popularity,
attested to by the panicked letters sent by Maronite bishops to their Patri-
arch warning him that they were losing control of their flock to Shahin’s
populism and by the letters sent to Shahin by Christian villagers in the
Druze districts asking for his help in liberating them, indicated a profound
crisis in traditional order. The crisis became a catastrophe in the spring of
1860, when the social unrest spread to the so-called mixed districts.
“Christian zeal [al-ghira al-masihiyya]” was not simply a religious slogan
bandied about by the ahali as they prepared to defend themselves from (or
to attack, depending on one’s perspective) non-Christians. It marked for
them a coming of age—not a return to a primordial kinship with other
Christians but a new geography that enabled them to come to the aid of
“brothers” in distress in Shi‘a and Druze regions of Mount Lebanon. It
was intertwined with a vocabulary of rights and an understanding of the
Tanzimat that legitimated the entrance of the mobilized general population
(jumhur) into formal politics. In the final analysis, it was the proclama-


[PDF page 134]
116 / The Return of the Juhhal
tion—if not fulfillment— of a subversive sectarian history and geogra-
phy.
Shahin’s populism was not more authentic or somehow historically
more progressive than the Khazins’ conservative vision of the Tanzimat;
nor was his discourse of the mobilized jumhur any more accurate a reflec-
tion of social reality than the Khazins’ descriptions of a quiescent ahali.
Shahin was not a pure class warrior, nor was the struggle in Kisrawan a
purely social struggle. As is so often the case with popular insurgencies,
Shahin began to conflate his own personal vision and interests with that of
the jumhur. His rise was meteoric, from an impoverished muleteer who
had traveled the width and breadth of Kisrawan to a legend whose fame
brought him accolades and appeals from across Mount Lebanon. He was
described as the “father of the sharpened sword” in a popular ballad, the
man who had provided the “peasant” with food and shelter while the
Khazin shaykhs “in Bikfayya of hunger died.”68 He was addressed as a bek,
which he quickly adopted as a title, and he provided himself with a seal that
rivaled those of the shaykhs. And as their efforts to vanquish him and the
juhhal by force failed, the elites began to address him as a shaykh. With his
unheard-of leap up the social ladder came the expected responsibilities of
the traditional notables against whom he was in rebellion: to control the
juhhal, to offer protection, to dictate morals, to reclaim debts, to disperse
crowds, and to be a za‘im [to be and, more important, to pose as a leader],
all of which he did with “Christian” faithfulness once his position in
Kisrawan was secure.69
The evident disjuncture between a homogenizing discourse and a het-
erogeneous reality—be it at the level of Bishop Murad’s Notice historique
or Tanyus Shahin’s jumhur— constituted the fundamental crisis in com-
munal identity and representation. This contradiction did not prevent men
like Shahin and, as we shall soon see, members of the Druze community
from acting to reconcile the contradictions of reform in Mount Lebanon,
from forcing reality, as it were, to conform to narrative. Just as the Khazins
had tried to physically end the rebellion and redefine the geography of
Kisrawan on the basis of loyalty to their family—for example when they
kidnapped and severely humiliated and beat two muleteers in a monastery
until blood “ran down their bodies as if it were water” and warned them to
“take heed that we do not want, and will not accept anyone who crosses
from Bilad Kisrawan to our bilad, Bilad Jbayl, or else we will do [as we have
done here]”70—some among the commoners of Kisrawan, flush with an
inflated sense of their own power, were not averse to redefining the bound-
aries of loyalty and treachery and to imposing new geographies of libera-


[PDF page 135]
The Return of the Juhhal / 117
tion and fear. In December of 1859, they marched on Baskinta to settle
some local affair; in April of 1860, the Patriarch received reports that
Shahin was spreading “rumors” to the ahali of Bilad Jbayl that Zahla, Dayr
al-Qamar, and the Matn were “united with him” and were “waiting for his
orders”;71 and in May of 1860 villagers from Kisrawan marched further
south still. “We have no idea” of what tomorrow will bring, read one re-
port to the authorities. They were soon to find out.
