[PDF page 136]
7 The Devil’s Work
I
t was the devil’s work. Such, at least, was the conviction of the anony-
mous author of a manuscript that described the devastation of Mount
Lebanon in 1860.1 Between May and the end of June, when the unrest of
Kisrawan spread to the mixed districts and when Christian ahali openly
repudiated Druze hegemony, crisis became catastrophe. In the months pre-
ceding the outbreak of war in late May, sectarian tensions ran high. Seem-
ingly random murders of Druzes and Maronites occurred in the first half
of 1860, which invariably drew retaliation. The intercommunal strife esca-
lated when villagers from Kisrawan mobilized in May and marched south
toward the Shuf—whether in response to Druze provocations or the cause
of Druze aggression is not, and probably will never be, known. What is cer-
tain, however, is that these mobilizations led to full-scale hostilities be-
tween Druzes and Maronites. At least two hundred villages were destroyed
in the resulting sectarian conflict. Thousands of villagers were maimed and
killed in what amounted to a savage campaign by both Christians and
Druzes to purify the land and to militarily resolve the contradictions of re-
form. The Druzes ultimately emerged victorious after their assaults
against Dayr al-Qamar, Zahla, Hasbayya, and Rashayya culminated in an
unprecedented rout and massacre of the Christian inhabitants.2 On one
level, therefore, the anonymous author who invoked the Devil’s name was
reacting to the horror of total Christian defeat; he was trying to come to
terms with a cataclysm whose magnitude, whose scale, and whose mean-
ing could not be conveyed through the historiographical tropes of every-
day politics in the old regime.
Many reasons, to be sure, have been advanced for the intensity of the
violence that occurred in June. Several accounts have emphasized the role
played by the rebels in Kisrawan in precipitating the war of 1860, espe-
118


[PDF page 137]
The Devil’s Work / 119
cially Tanyus Shahin’s proclamations, which provoked a great anxiety
among the Druzes, who had no place in his sectarian vision of liberation.3
Others, like the author of the manuscript Kitab nawadir al-zaman fi
tarikh Jabal Lubnan, claim that 1860 was “revenge” for the fighting of
the 1840s, when the Christians burned many of the villages in the Shuf.4
The most common and persuasive interpretation put forward by histori-
ans rests on a combination of causal factors, including alleged Ottoman
policies of “divide and rule,” Great Power machinations, material factors
such as the decline of textile production in Syria, and sectarian tensions
left over from the days of the Egyptian occupation.5 While the search for
“root causes” of the violence has illuminated many different aspects of the
struggle in 1860, the historiography of the period has not yet delved into
the nature of the violence itself.6 Despite their many differences, histori-
ans have approached the question of 1860 with one overriding concern:
how to explain the “degeneration” of Mount Lebanon. The violence
therefore is treated as symptomatic rather than as instructive in its own
right.7 Rarely discussed—although it seems to be one of the fundamental
facets of the war of 1860 —is its transgressive nature, which violated so-
cial as well as geographic and religious boundaries. Although many times
during the strife common villagers stood behind their notables, especially
when a village or community was threatened with total extirpation, the
isolated killings, the battles for control of particular villages, and the gen-
eral massacres were elements of a wider struggle under way since the ad-
vent of the Tanzimat and restoration in 1840, but particularly since the
Kisrawan revolt in 1858, to demarcate new social and physical bound-
aries.8
This chapter narrates how the elites of Mount Lebanon repeatedly and
desperately tried to regain the initiative from the mobilized populace as the
war proceeded and how they finally succeeded in reconstituting the social
order after the fighting ended in Mount Lebanon. In doing so, it concen-
trates on certain moments of violence that cast light on the nature and con-
tradictions of sectarianism.9 The goal is to highlight the social tension in-
herent in the religious strife—not simply across communal boundaries
but within them as well.10 The goal is also to unsettle the pretension of ho-
mogeneity and solidity of communal identity that the term sectarianism
implies. The war of 1860 was an attempt to resolve the contradictions of
and the fears engendered by the conflicting sectarian imaginations let
loose on the land since the restoration of Ottoman rule in 1840. The vio-
lence indicated not a resurfacing of old hatreds but a historical develop-
ment of new ones. It must be understood, in its most immediate and dra-


[PDF page 138]
120 / The Devil’s Work
matic context, as a single challenge to the social order that began in
Kisrawan in 1858 and culminated in the mixed districts in the summer of
1860.
the context of the 1860 events
The panic that Shahin induced among the notables in Baskinta, the sheer
apoplexy he generated in the British consul in Beirut and the French con-
sul, as well as the consternation he elicited from the Christian kaymakam,
Maronite bishops, and the Patriarch point toward a profound instability in
the representation of a single Christian community. In the space of a year
and a half, from Christmas 1858, when Shahin first rose to prominence,
until the intercommunal clashes of the summer of 1860, the notion of who
represented the Maronite sect and, indeed, what the parameters of accept-
able behavior were for anybody belonging to that sect remained ambigu-
ous. Throughout 1860, Shahin and ahali like him saw little difference be-
tween social liberation in Kisrawan and freedom from Druze “tyranny”
for the Christians of the mixed regions. Persistent rumors that the Patri-
arch blessed Shahin thrived despite repeated denials by the Patriarch.
When two villagers from Ghusta appeared suddenly in May of 1860 at the
entrance of a Maronite Church headed by a Khazin and demanded 2,000
piasters to fight the Druzes, the lines between extortion, anti-Khazin sen-
timent, and genuine concern for the fate of Christians in the mixed dis-
tricts became increasingly difficult to demarcate.11
When Shahin’s men crossed Nahr al-Kalb in May of 1860 on their way
to defend the Christians of the mixed districts, their challenge to the elit-
ist social order was threefold. First, they staked their claim as defenders of
the faith when it became clear in their eyes that the notables and the con-
suls were not moving quickly enough to protect the Christian commu-
nity.12 Second, they imagined a Christian geography that bound villagers
from Kisrawan to those of the Matn and the Shuf; in so doing they defied
the traditional demarcations of the notable families that had hitherto de-
fined Lebanese geography, and they ignored the new geography of the Eu-
ropean-Ottoman partition that delegated authority to kaymakams chosen
from among the elites. Third, and perhaps most important, the rebels pre-
served their autonomy by taking matters into their own hands. They did
not wait to be ordered into action; they provoked action.13 The rebels did
not heed the threats of Hurs¸id Pasha, the governor of Sayda, to disband and
disperse from an imperial road (from Juniya to Beirut). On the contrary,
they continued their display of armed insurrection, which, while not


[PDF page 139]
The Devil’s Work / 121
specifically directed against the Ottoman state, was nevertheless a
poignant reminder of their subversive understanding of Ottoman re-
form.14
Around these mobilizations, the elitist reaction to contain the “disor-
der” attained a nearly frantic pace. Meetings were held around the clock in
Beirut; secret envoys were sent from the French consulate to the Patriar-
chate to settle on a common position which could be presented to the Ot-
toman government. The French consul, the Comte de Bentivoglio, stalled
for time when the Ottoman government gave orders in April of 1860 to
send troops to Kisrawan to “restore the ahali to the yoke of obedience.” For
Bentivoglio, Kisrawan had to remain an inviolable Christian sanctuary.
The presence of Ottoman soldiers there, he warned the Patriarch, would
certainly bring “ruin to the country.”15 Earlier, in a long dispatch to the
foreign ministry in the beginning of 1860, Bentivoglio had candidly ex-
pressed his fears of the intensification of the “revolution” in which the
clergy themselves seemed “not to be respected.” More worrisome were the
reports he received that the rebels had been hoisting the French flag at
their meetings and during their “riots.” For that reason he sent a deputy to
restrain the “esprits ignorants et enthousiastes” to try to “to stop the
course of revolution.”16 In a letter to the Patriarch a few days later, Ben-
tivoglio underscored his dismay at the situation: he accused Shahin of de-
liberately manipulating the “anarchy” in Kisrawan to promote a state of
affairs that bore a striking resemblance to the dreaded French Revolution
instead of to an ordered, Catholic, conservative France.17 The English,
Russian, Austrian, and Prussian consuls similarly tried to restore calm.
Druze notables again raised the specter of common ruin if the notables did
not act with unity, while the Khazin shaykhs persisted in their supplica-
tions for help against Shahin from any of the Great Powers who would
grant them an audience.18
The Ottoman authorities summoned Bishop ‘Awn to explain matters,
especially now that the Kisrawanites had “unfurled the flag”—a clear sign
of their willingness to engage in combat—near Nahr al-Kalb. ‘Awn re-
ported Hurs¸id’s impatience with the rebels, saying that the governor
“asked me to transmit to Your Beatitude that we do all we can do to disband
these inappropriate and unruly gatherings, and that Your Beatitude warns
them of the consequences since both Juniya and Nahr al-Kalb are on an
imperial road which is traversed by many men of honor and religion, lest
the slightest attack against them take place.”19
While the commoners from Kisrawan were camped somewhere near
Nahr al-Kalb listening to no orders but their own, in Beirut Bishop ‘Awn,


[PDF page 140]
122 / The Devil’s Work
in his capacity as a representative of the Maronite community, was con-
ducting negotiations with Hurs¸id. The two situations could not have been
more at odds. Around Nahr al-Kalb, billeted on the road, was a ramshackle
assembly of commoners, most of whom would have been illiterate, armed
probably with aging muskets left over from the 1840 allied invasion but
also with daggers and an assortment of weaponry and farm equipment.
They were united by a common fear of the Druzes and a loathing of Khazin
tyranny, convinced of their Christian duty to defend their brethren in the
south and of their rights as guaranteed by the Tanzimat. In Beirut sat
‘Awn, decked out in the finery of a Maronite bishop, negotiating with an
Ottoman governor who held ‘Awn accountable for the “unruly gather-
ings” of the Kisrawanites. The truth of the matter was that ‘Awn had no
control over Shahin or the commoners; he pretended to Hurs¸id that he had
control over the Maronites, just as Bishop Nicolas Murad had earlier pre-
sented himself as the “spokesman” of the Christians in his Notice his-
torique. Consequently, ‘Awn was deemed by Hurs¸id to be the man who
held the popular card in his hand. “Khurshid [Hurs¸id] promised,” wrote
‘Awn to Patriarch Mas‘ad, “to take all necessary steps and I promised him
that we would refrain from all provocation. Accordingly, we implore Your
Beatitude to do what is necessary in regards to Kisrawan, fulfilling the
Governor’s orders.”20 The plea from ‘Awn to Mas‘ad reflected an anxiety
among the elites in Mount Lebanon, who were simply not capable of com-
ing to terms with a genuinely popular dimension to communal discourse
and yet, at the same time, were increasingly aware that they could no
longer ignore it.21
‘Awn urged Tanyus Shahin to end his lack of discipline and to disperse
the crowds gathered in Antilyas. Shahin responded by indirectly high-
lighting the failure of the established hierarchies to protect the rights of
the Christians and added:
We state that the crowd in Antilyas is gathered because of the oppression
that has befallen their Christian brothers by the Druzes who have stolen
their money, killed their priests, plundered their churches and monas-
teries and destroyed their peace—a state of affairs well-known to the
world. . . . And just as we see that what is happening to the Christians [at
the hands of] the Druze sect is happening without protest, we know very
well that we are all slaves of the State and that it is our duty to wish it
happiness and to pray for its continuation just as we earnestly desire that
imperial justice is executed without differentiation; how then can the
Antilyas crowd be dispersed, a crowd which is entirely peaceful and obe-
dient to the State but which waits for the authority of the government


[PDF page 141]
The Devil’s Work / 123
and the fulfillment of its orders which were issued days ago to the Druze
bands who are daily spilling the blood of Christians; so how is it possible
under these conditions to convince the crowd before a single Druze band
22
has been dispersed?
Shahin, in effect, openly proposed to lead the deliverance of the Christians
of the mixed districts in accordance with the precepts of post-Tanzimat Ot-
toman justice. He knew that the Maronite Patriarch could not openly con-
demn a popular initiative to liberate the Christians in the Shuf; besides,
some among the clergy were relieved that Shahin had directed his atten-
tion outside of Kisrawan. One priest writing to the Patriarch confessed that
“everyone” appreciated the rebels’ actions because if they had remained
“white-eyed” (i.e., obstinate in rebellion), they would have been subjected
to the curses of friend and foe alike. The campaign to “save” the Christians
of the mixed districts, he added, was a great opportunity for them and their
leaders to “turn a new page.” Maybe “what Tanyus is doing will force all
the enemy and their leaders to sue for peace with the Christians.”23 Later
this same priest urged the Patriarch to act quickly to save Kisrawan. “Nei-
ther we nor the shaykhs have any doubt,” he said, “you will not let this op-
portunity slip to resolve the [Kisrawan] question through peaceful means.
The fruit we shall reap accordingly shall be to let the government and our
opponents believe that unity has been reached between the Maronites.”24
In May of 1860, however, when the Maronites were called on to pro-
duce their unified sect, villagers in Kisrawan succeeded only in mustering
themselves into a loose fighting force—army would be far too formal a
name for the few hundred villagers camped near Nahr al-Kalb. And even
this band of villagers, according to ‘Awn’s own confession in a confidential
dispatch to his Patriarch, could not be kept in check, “for they are totally
reckless (al-jama‘a fi batr kulli).”25 On the cusp of a dramatic showdown
with the Druzes, the Maronites were in disarray. ‘Awn admitted as much
when he informed Mas‘ad, “We now expect by the minute the beginning
of war, which necessitates alertness from all your children; in case word
reaches them to begin the fighting they will do so as one raging force to
save their brothers, for if they are let down this time we will taste a hu-
miliation more bitter than death itself; . . . we pray to God to grant us a
happy outcome.”26
Shahin himself was under tremendous pressure to live up to his reputa-
tion. On 24 May, for example, villagers from Kisrawan assembled at An-
tilyas wrote to him that they had already burned several Druze houses and
urged him not to delay in joining the battle. “Your mobilization is ab-


[PDF page 142]
124 / The Devil’s Work
solutely necessary,” they wrote, “for if you do not rise as a jumhur imme-
diately the people of Kisrawan [will be thought of as] a laughingstock and
cowards.” The letter went on to inform Shahin that ammunition was read-
ily available and that he should not waste his time seeking the Patriarch’s
blessing “because there is no longer need of it” given that “we are in” the
presence of Mar Ilyas (St. Elie). The plea concluded, “O Bek, O Bek, don’t
throw away the blessing” of Mar Ilyas, and drew attention to the “news”
that Baskinta, Shwayr, and all other districts had risen, except for
Kisrawan.27 As a “bek” Shahin found himself in an ironic position, for he
was confronted with a notion of collective action and will that bypassed
traditional authority, which he had himself repeatedly deployed in
Kisrawan. As rumors swirled around and as the situation in the mixed dis-
tricts deteriorated, the blunt but common-dialect religious discourse of the
letter raised a central question about the 1860 violence: where in Mount
Lebanon were the boundaries of morality, fraternity, civility, and commu-
nity to be drawn, and who was to draw them? Shahin wasted little time in
attempting to answer this question, for he quickly sent off letters to vil-
lages in Kisrawan asking them to contribute to the common cause. He
wrote to the villages of Kfur and Ftuh urging them to send their women to
deliver water to the warriors, telling them that he had plenty of ammuni-
tion, and reminding them to mobilize the clergy for this “Christian” con-
cern.28
the nonemergence of the ta’ifa
In Kisrawan itself, the heartland of the Maronites, the sense of frustration
and failure was even more palpable. Just as Bishop ‘Awn, Hurs¸id Pasha,
and Bentivoglio had each in his own way expressed his anxiety at the un-
folding events, the Jesuits who had ensconced themselves in Ghazir left a
diary that captured the fear of 1860 and the general Jesuit disappointment
with the nonemergence of the Maronite nation in its most desperate hour.
At first, rumors arrived that sectarian tensions had boiled over into skir-
mishes. The entry for 16 May, for example, notes that two Muslims were
assassinated near Ghazir and that the inhabitants pursued the assailants,
six Orthodox men, and caught and imprisoned them only to release them
when it was feared that their incarceration would provoke “sedition” in the
country.29 On the 19th, there was “talk” of the killings of fourteen Chris-
tians by the Druzes and also of the murder of three Druzes. Letters arrived
from Beirut that day urging the inhabitants of Ghazir to take up arms
against the Druzes; the next day another letter arrived once more exhort-


[PDF page 143]
The Devil’s Work / 125
ing the people of Ghazir to march on the Druzes. On the 22nd a third let-
ter came, saying that if the people of Ghazir ignored the call for help, the
summons would not be repeated.30
The Jesuits, meanwhile, were actively encouraging the inhabitants to
maintain hope for a Christian victory, while they themselves anxiously
waited for news from the front. They learned that the Maronite Patriarch
had offered to defray the costs of volunteers who were willing to head
south, but as the entry for 23 May stated, “For a long time the church bell
of Ghazir has been tolling to gather the villagers together and to decide
who must march against the Druzes. But it seems that nobody wants to
leave his home.”31 From Bikfayya came two Jesuit priests who had fled for
their lives. Father Abougit gave sermons exhorting the notables and com-
moners to take courage: all of the small number of notables departing
southward came to the Jesuits, made their confessions, and then stitched a
cross on their garments. They tried to muster men to fight the Druzes. Al-
most immediately, however, the notables were warned by the Ottoman au-
thorities that no armed bands were to be tolerated, so they abandoned their
efforts without even leaving the confines of Ghazir.32
Frustration with local unwillingness to save the Christians in the mixed
districts was compounded by increasing panic. On 30 May, a Capuchin
monk brought definite news that war had commenced between Christians
and Druzes. “Indeed,” he confessed, “from our own roof we can see in the
distance the tremendous plumes of smoke.”33 There was talk of raising a
force to join the “army of Kisrawan” led by Tanyus Shahin, but neither the
notables nor the Jesuits were happy with the idea. The Jesuits, in fact, sent
an envoy to the Patriarch to explain that all the misfortunes that had be-
fallen the Maronites in recent times were caused by Shahin.34 Although
the envoy succeeded “in exciting the indignation of these men against this
wicked man,” the entry for 6 June reads, “[the] Patriarch and his Bishops
thought that the time was not ripe to get rid of this man [de le mettre de
côté]. They fear that the army will be divided if such an operation is
mounted.”35
The Maronite establishment was paralyzed with indecision. On the one
hand, sectarian warfare legitimated Tanyus Shahin, but, on the other
hand, his presence symbolized division and disorder in the eyes of the
elites. Once full-scale violence became imminent, by May of 1860, the
Christian bishops and Druze notables could not turn their backs on their
own communities. They could not seem to take the side of the “enemy,”
and so they reluctantly joined the fray, one hand trying to seize the initia-
tive back from the ahali by organizing the defense of the Christians as


[PDF page 144]
126 / The Devil’s Work
Bishops ‘Awn and Butrus al-Bustani did, and the other reaching out to
other notables, foreign consuls, and the Ottoman government to contain
the unrest.36 In Ghazir, meanwhile, the Jesuits who had patiently labored
for three decades to produce reformed and purely Christian spaces sank
back in horror at the unfolding catastrophe. Students in the seminary were
sent home; the library was moved to the vaults. In Bkirke, the Patriarch
also met with Yusuf Karam, a notable from the north, who brought with
him an estimated four hundred Maronite soldiers to repulse the Druzes.
Karam’s men, it seemed, were no more up to the task of saving their
brethren than the Kisrawanites. “Yusuf Karam,” read one of the final en-
tries in the diary, “in an attempt to boost the courage of his men, told them
that he learned that the Druzes had arrived in Shwayr (in the Matn, near
Bikfayya) and that they were threatening to burn it, and that each man
must enter the field of battle and take his weapon and follow him to repulse
the Druzes. But of the nearly 3,000 who daily turn up at the distribution of
rations, barely 400 obeyed the orders of their chief. Yusuf Karam, in de-
spair, disbanded his army, and each man returned to his own village.”37
Day after day, news reached Ghazir of more burnings, more pillaged
monasteries, more Christian “martyrs,” including several Jesuits killed in
Zahla. Day after day, despair sapped te seemingly limitless optimism of the
gentle crusade until, finally, the Jesuits abandoned Ghazir toward the end
of June to board a French frigate.
The frantic withdrawal of the Jesuits to the safety of the French war-
ships was an option not open to the bulk of the Christian inhabitants of
Mount Lebanon. Their lot was to face the wrath of the Druzes in a con-
tested sectarian landscape which the Jesuits, in disgust as much as in dis-
may, had been forced to quit. The killing near Zahla of Father Edouard Bil-
lotet, one of the longest-serving Jesuits, had driven home the point to the
foreign elites: the sectarian mobilizations were difficult, if not impossible,
to control, and the protection long afforded them by Druze and Christian
notables alike had ended in the tumult of war. Shahin and his followers
fared no better under the circumstances. As it turned out, the men from
Kisrawan, who numbered five hundred, failed in their efforts to help their
coreligionists in the Shuf.38 Tanyus Shahin fell sick—a sympathetic source
claimed that he was poisoned— during the march from Kisrawan to the
Matn.39 And his efforts to goad other Kisrawanites into action fell on deaf
ears, especially after it became clear that the battle against the Druzes was
no simple affair.40 Some of those who did march southward settled on pil-
laging a caravan of goods belonging to the Christian kaymakam, including
his prized horses, which he was trying to protect from the Druzes.41 The


[PDF page 145]
The Devil’s Work / 127
French consul wrote to the Patriarch denouncing Kisrawanites who had
plundered a wheat caravan belonging to Muslim traders near Antilyas and
had forced the mules to Rayfun, Tanyus Shahin’s own village.42 The ever-
dwindling number that finally reached the Matn and Shuf districts found
themselves at odds with the local Christians from Bayt Miri and other vil-
lages. Far from welcoming the Kisrawanites as saviors, the Christian vil-
lagers of the mixed districts pleaded with them to return from where they
had come, lest the Druzes use their arrival as a pretext to expel all Chris-
tians from the Shuf.43
The Patriarch received reports that in Bikfayya, in the heart of the
Matn, an assembly of Maronite villagers was determined to open battle
with the Druzes by first burning the home of the Christian kaymakam.
Such was the news that the Patriarch continued to receive throughout
June, when the Druzes were gaining the upper hand in the war. Still the
situation got worse: refugees streamed in from the Shuf villages occupied
by the Druzes; Mas‘ad appealed to the foreign consuls for immediate food
relief because there was “fear” of “sedition” between the starving Chris-
tian refugees and the Kisrawanites.44
localized violence: breaking the social order
The fear that enveloped the Maronite hierarchy as it helplessly watched
the destruction of one Christian village after another gave rise to myriad
rumors. As the violence escalated and the condition of the Christians in the
mixed districts worsened in June, the explanations given for the disorder,
both by word of mouth and through letters to and from the Patriarch, be-
came increasingly detached from the material world inhabited by the local
population. What began, in other words, as a problem of disorder in
Kisrawan and the rule of “ignorance” in 1859 became by July 1860 an in-
creasingly “clear” conspiracy led by the enemies of the Maronite ta’ifa.
The violence was framed in apocalyptic as well as conspiratorial terms that
had lost all sense of contingency and indeed of ordinary human agency.
Every action, it seemed, was calculated by secret conspirators to divide the
Christians (whether it be an Ottoman effort to disperse the Druzes by fir-
ing cannons at them, which was retrospectively seen as the “signal” for a
general massacre of Christians, or Hurs¸id’s unsuccessful efforts to prevent
bloodshed, which were later interpreted as deliberate foot dragging).45
The belief in plots and mysterious signals, however, obfuscated an im-
portant dimension to the violence of 1860: the involvement of the ahali in
politics not in response to external agitation but as a result of the contra-


[PDF page 146]
128 / The Devil’s Work
dictions of reform. In both Kisrawan (1859) and in the mixed districts
(1860), the main tension lay between a restoration and reinstatement of
privilege (which the notables embraced wholeheartedly) and the liberation
of the ahali from oppression.46 If in Kisrawan the tension manifested itself
primarily as a social struggle because of the demographic reality of a ho-
mogenous Maronite population, it nevertheless relied on religious im-
agery and a sectarian vocabulary. However, in the districts “inconve-
niently” inhabited by a religiously mixed population (to recall the British
characterization of the situation), the tension displayed itself more as a re-
ligious contest, yet one that was heavily informed by a social discourse. In
this sense, the circumstances surrounding the violence of 1860 must be
understood not as conspiratorial but as contingent, not as tribal but as
modern, not as unexplainable but as a comprehensible attempt to purify a
reformed landscape created by the combined efforts of locals, Europeans,
and Ottomans.
What was occurring in the latter part of 1859 and particularly in the
winter and spring of 1860 was a dismantling of the increasingly tenuous
bonds of civility that had in the past bound Druzes and Maronites to-
gether. The random acts of violence that preceded the war in the summer
of 1860 were not simply indications of “anarchy”: they amounted to cu-
mulative blows against any notion of a nonsectarian geography or civility.
The intercommunal violence that followed reflected the desperate struggle
to reconstitute society along pure and segregated sectarian lines. Attacks
took place at night, in secret, and through ambushes. More often than not,
assailants were never apprehended. The killing of a Druze muleteer on a
specific back road was not just a random act of murder—it was a warning
sent to all Druzes of a particular locale that they were at risk. The mutila-
tion of Christians who were deliberately left alive after having their ears
cut off was also a mockery of traditional society and its rituals of justice.
Unlike traditional juridical mutilations—the branding of a face, the cut-
ting out of a tongue, the gouging out of eyes, or the cutting off of an ear—
which reflected the outcomes of a Bourdieuesque distortion of elite rituals
of power and physically marked the end of elite rivalries in which both
parties were known, the goal of the mutilations in 1860 —the cutting off
of both ears—was to inspire fear of the unknown assailants who might
strike at any moment without warning. The mutilations reinforced new
sectarian geographies into which Druzes or Christians (depending on the
area) feared to venture. Equally significant, they revealed new geographies
that were defined communally rather than genealogically. The terror in-
duced by such murders allowed Shahin to position himself as the protector


[PDF page 147]
The Devil’s Work / 129
of all the Christians of Mount Lebanon, regardless of traditional notable
prerogatives.
The killings illustrated— deliberately or not we will never know—the
elites’ loss of control over the situation and their inability to prevent fur-
ther murders. Each seemingly random murder constituted a challenge to
the social order and a declaration that politics was being played according
to new rules. Maronite Bishop Bustani elaborated on this sense of help-
lessness when, in a letter to the Patriarch written in early May, he reported
skirmishes around Shqif, near Hasbayya, that resulted in the death of a
Christian at the hands of a Druze man. Bustani wrote confidentially:
There was tumult [hayajan] among the juhla who were determined to
cause sedition but we prevented them. Emir Sa‘d al-Din Shihab arrested
the known culprit and made him give evidence against his comrades, but
you know how difficult it is to achieve justice in such times for crimes of
murder and, thus, the case has not been resolved; we remain with the
‘uqula [wise ones] of the district [vigilant] in warning the ignorants to
make sure that they give no cause to spark the sedition, either in the in-
side or the outside. During this time, a Druze man was found murdered
near the Hasbayya river, and another Druze man was found wounded
there from the village of Mhaydthat Rashayya. When the search began
for the culprits, the Druze man said that his assailants were [Shi‘a]; nev-
ertheless, the Druzes said the attackers were Christian from the Iqlim,
but disagreed on who exactly to blame. Some said fulan [so and so] did
it, and others said the opposite. We once again warned everyone to avoid
all provocations and instigations of unrest both here and abroad. God . . .
will bring matters to a felicitous end and [prevent] the spilling of much
blood that circumstances threaten to provoke. The signs of destruction
and war are many. Hope that these instigations will subside and hope for
. . . putting out the smoldering embers of the tumult is not high, be-
cause the nature of these misguided people is not to remain still but to
spread the flames of the fire-log. We notice that the Druzes are prepar-
47
ing to light the fuse of war, at least their juhhal.
It was precisely the sheer randomness of the violence that kept the elites
off balance. They never knew where to turn. Sa‘id Janbulat, for example,
wrote letters to the Ottoman authorities and to the Christian elites assur-
ing them that he had managed to restore order in the Shuf, but no sooner
had he done so than a Christian was slain on 26 May by unidentified as-
sailants near ‘Aynab after two Druzes had been murdered near the Beirut
River. According to another priest’s report, news trickled back to the ahali
of Dayr al-Qamar that the Christian was one of their men, so they “turned
on the Druzes [living] amongst them and there was a lot of shooting.”48


[PDF page 148]
130 / The Devil’s Work
When Druze muleteers were found dead at Khan al-Warwar, their families
went to Sa‘id Janbulat, asking him to give permission to kill the murderers
or at least one of the respectable Christian “faces” of Shwayfat. When Jan-
bulat refused to give his permission, they demanded that they at least be
allowed to go beyond the borders of Mount Lebanon to kill any two Chris-
tians. Still Janbulat refused, but the family took matters into its own
hands; waiting in ambush just over Mount Lebanon in the Khan of
Muhammad ‘Ali near Nabatiyya, they saw three Christians and killed two
of them, leaving the third for dead after they cut off his ears.49
The Ottoman governor, Hurs¸id, wrote to the Grand Vizier’s office on 20
May informing him that because of the intrigues of foreign agents “the
age-old enmity [min el-kadim derkar olan . . . adaveti] between Druzes
and Christians in Mount Lebanon” had commenced “with both sides com-
mitting abominable acts like murder.” He described the situation:
The past day between the Sayda and Jba‘ districts there is a place called
Khan Muhammad ‘Ali where three Christians were found murdered;
and although their murderers were not found, the Christians decided
that it must have been the Druzes and so killed two Druzes in the region
of Sayda at a place called Ramlat al-Hajr; a third they left wounded after
they cut off his ears. Despite the fact that we took the necessary precau-
tions as soon as the news was received, when the Druze side heard this,
and when the Druze villagers of Kajluniyya [Kahluniyya] heard of a
Christian priest and two other Christians from Jazzin on their way from
Dayr al-Qamar to Marj Bisri who were said to have molested several
Druze children, they killed the lot of them. Word of this spread here and
there and this created a large sedition between Druzes and Christians.
And although the muqata‘jis took measures to prevent the disorder
from escalating, there is a fear that a further deterioration may take
place. During these times, the transfer of troops of the Arabistan Army
from their posts to Istanbul has given rise to rumors and lies, notably
among the seditious and rebellious Kisrawanites whose hearts have been
boldened by the fact that they have till now remained unpunished. In
Hasbayya and Rashayya, which are in the province of Damascus, this en-
mity [between Druze and Christian] has pushed the Druzes to carry out
their seditious acts however they can, but the energetic actions taken by
[our] officials in accordance with [imperial] duties have contained the
sedition by immediately issuing the necessary warnings and threats in
accordance with the nature of the Mountain people to all sides; in addi-
tion, the sending again of regular cavalry and investigating officers
makes it possible to prevent a further outburst. In accordance to the [im-
perial] wishes, steps have been taken to arrest and punish those who
have been involved in killing and other unsuitable acts, and if you re-


[PDF page 149]
The Devil’s Work / 131
ceive reports from other partes that suggest otherwise, I have taken the
50
liberty to present you with the truth of the matter.
The tone of Hurs¸id’s letter was that of a governor who, having lost con-
trol of the situation, took refuge in a myth of primordial communalism to
explain the violence. He boasted that he knew “the character” of these
“Mountain people.” That it was a new conflict over a sectarian landscape
that had since 1842 imperfectly defined the social and cultural boundaries
of Mount Lebanon was the last thing on his mind. Hurs¸id’s world, like that
of the notables who obeyed him, was one of strict hudud, or limits. The
problem, as far as he could tell, was that Christians and Druzes had “ex-
ceeded their limits,” and the solution, for him, was that each person return
“to his place,” which to Hurs¸id meant both the actual villages of the com-
batants as well as to their supposed standing in society.51 In the midst of
the crisis, he still referred to the Maronite Patriarch as “our friend, the Es-
teemed Patriarch of the Maronite ta’ifa, chief of the Christian ta’ifa and
pride of the Christian millet” as if the Patriarch could control all those who
fought in the name of Christianity.52 The entire authority structure was
hierarchical, and since those immediately responsible to him, the kay-
makams and the muqata‘jis, were not involved with the violence but were
trying to contain it, his own ability to interfere was severely constrained.
The social order that had been disturbed in Kisrawan and that had been
teetering in the Matn since the Bayt Miri incident of 1859 was now in the
process of collapse in the Shuf and beyond, in Hasbayya and Rashayya. But
it would be wrong to suggest that these initial stages of violence were in
any way planned or part of a grand scheme of social liberation. Rather, in
the contested sectarian climate—unstable since the restoration of 1840
and rapidly deteriorating since Kisrawan—the killing of a Druze or a
Christian had far greater ramifications than it would have had otherwise.53
In some cases, as Hurs¸id’s dispatch indicated, the villagers mobilized after a
rumor arrived of the molestation of Druze children; in other villages, a
death had to be avenged. In and of themselves, such incidents were not
new, but in the sectarian climate of partition, where religious identity be-
came paramount in defining not just politics and culture but also geogra-
phy, the killing of a Christian or Druze had implications that rapidly
spread beyond the immediate context of a particular feud or village dis-
pute. A killing was no longer simply a family affair, it was a communal af-
fair; and revenge could be taken not simply on a member of the murderer’s
family or village but on a member of his religious community at large. In
the absence of the old-regime mechanisms of notable politics and social


[PDF page 150]
132 / The Devil’s Work
control, the rumor of the molestation of Druze children by a Christian
priest, who in many ways personified the Christian community, suddenly
became credible. Consequently, even a minor incident could lead to general
violence between Druzes and Christians.
I should make clear here that the cycle of violence, the tit-for-tat
killings, also produced moments when Druzes protected Christians and
Christians protected Druzes. For example, Sa‘id Janbulat appealed to the
Christian notables to hold back their villagers, while he vowed to restrain
his own men.54 When a priest accused of molesting Druze children was
killed by Druze villagers, a Druze man, ‘Ali Ahmad Hasan ‘Abd al-Samad
from ‘Amatur, happened to be in the Christian village of Rum. Under-
standably fearing for his life, ‘Ali Ahmad sought refuge with Hanna Tan-
nus, a blacksmith who was also an agent for the properties of the sons of
shaykh Hammud Janbulat. In the Christian man’s home, ‘Ali Ahmad hid
until he could be spirited away to safety by Orthodox Christians. Simi-
larly, one of the hapless Christian priest’s companions managed to outwit
his Druze pursuers by hiding in the flour mill of the Druze Abu ‘Ali Matar
Abu Shaqra before moving to Fahd Kan‘an Abu-Shaqra’s house. Abu-
Shaqra, in turn, provided him with two Druze escorts to guide him along
back roads to his village.55
Yet for all these acts of compassion, for all these genuine and monu-
mental acts of kindness, the prevailing atmosphere tended toward greater
communal separation and segregation with each additional killing.
Whether in response to this hostile environment or because of it (or both),
young male Christian villagers of the Shuf and neighboring districts fol-
lowed the example set by the villagers of Kisrawan. They began to organ-
ize themselves into militias, each of which was headed by a self-proclaimed
shaykh al-shabab (leader of the young men) and whose followers called
themselves the jahala—which has the same root as juhhal (j-h-l, or “ig-
norance”) but which also evokes a sense of folie de jeunesse, youthful
strength and bravery without heed of the consequences.56 They dressed in
a distinctive fashion, wearing a white shirwal (baggy pants) over which
they wore a loose white shirt, which resembled, according to Abu-Shaqra,
the skirts worn by the Albanian soldiers. And over these, the self-styled
Christian youth brigades covered their legs with red leather and wore caps
on their heads and mandils (head scarves) like those of the Bedouins.57
Their task, quite simply, was to “defend” themselves and “their” land
against feared Druze attacks.
Beyond this task, however, lay a moral aspect to the mobilization of the
young men— or those who aspired to be counted as young men—that


[PDF page 151]
The Devil’s Work / 133
challenged traditional social order. Michael Gilsenan has shown in his
work on the region of ‘Akkar that the shabab in any particular region rep-
resented a gradation in a male hierarchy that separated boys from senior
men, and they were continually tested and judged in their rhetorical and
performative abilities to be young men. Therefore times of conflict, such as
1860, afforded the shabab of the Shuf an opportunity to become the effec-
tive leaders of their community; defenders of village honor, pride, and se-
curity; and the heroes of village legends in the aftermath.58 The organiza-
tion of a distinctly Christian shabab not only repudiated the patriarchy of
Druze notables, and hence the political and moral basis of the old regime,
but it also, in a sense, circumvented and replaced established Christian
leaderships, which were unable or unwilling to fight like “real” men. It
was not for nothing that Tanyus Shahin’s followers told him to either mo-
bilize or become an object of ridicule, that Maronite priests constantly re-
minded their Patriarch of the humiliation the Maronite Church would ex-
perience if the Patriarch did not act decisively, or that individuals risked
their lives in feats of bravado during combat to prove that they were indeed
brave men—such as when Maronites from Kisrawan defied the gauntlet of
Druze musketry to grab sacks of silk that the Druzes had deliberately
placed in open stretches of the road.59
This defiance of the notable social order did not, of course, imply a com-
plete break with all traditional notions of community and subjecthood. The
Christian villagers who rebelled against Druze control underscored their
belief that their actions were legitimated by their status as obedient sub-
jects who were merely recovering rights guaranteed them by the Tanzi-
mat. Under the circumstances, the most important of these rights was that
of protection and security, which allowed them to mobilize against the al-
leged oppressions of their notables. The demographic composition of the
Shuf—where the Druzes outnumbered the Christians—made the Chris-
tians all the more eager to invoke their status as “slaves of the Sultan” in
order basically to cast themselves in the roles of victims in need of imperial
protection from “the Druze Mokattajis [muqata‘jis], [who] during past
times have never been punished or checked by the [government] for any of
their misdeeds and outrages upon us, the slaves of your [government].”60
This was not a tax revolt. It was a repudiation of the Druze-dominated so-
cial order that held sway in the Shuf and the other mixed districts and was
an attempt to establish a more equitable rule under Ottoman sovereignty.
It was one more call in the cacophony of competing Christian claims of lib-
eration that were heard in the years 1859 and 1860. By their very exis-
tence, the shaykh al-shababs declared to the Druze and Christian elites, to


[PDF page 152]
134 / The Devil’s Work
the Maronite Church as much as to the Druze landowners, to the Khazins
as much as to the Janbulats that the ordinary sectarian actor had emerged
in his own right and had bypassed traditional channels of authority to
wage war against the Druzes.
Taken together, these initial episodes of violence, counterviolence, and
resistance to violence underscored that the untenable compromises by the
elites were based on illusions of control over their respective communities.
Neither Bishop ‘Awn nor Sa‘id Janbulat controlled the situation on the
ground. Indeed, the sects they imagined themselves to be leading were of-
ten to be found compromising the integrity of their leaders, defying or-
ders, and generally exhibiting what the elites described as “ignorance.”
The disturbances also revealed the futility of Ottoman efforts to restore
order by directing their attention to the notables, for in fact the common-
ers were often in the vanguard of the violence. Tahir Pasha, for example,
was sent with an expeditionary force to separate the Druzes from the Mar-
onites in early June. He was confronted by a band of Kisrawanites with no
discernible leader. Confused, he ordered Druze notables to keep the peace;
he cajoled and warned them, only to see sectarian clashes erupt soon there-
after.61
More important, the individual murders reinforced a current of fear
that ran though sectarian society. As in the early 1840s, nobody could be
sure who would be the next victim. Despite traditional ties that bound
Druze and Christian families together and despite elite compacts and at-
tempts to restrain the “ignorants,” the initial phase of the violence marked
a demarcation of new sectarian geographies. Areas emerged in which
Christians dared not travel and into which Druzes and other Muslims
feared to venture. Christians and Druzes turned inward, shunning each
other out of an imagined fear that the “other” side was plotting against
them. In the volatile sectarian climate, security was increasingly guaran-
teed by the absence of rival communities. For example, in one village a
small argument between a Muslim and a Christian villager in May imme-
diately produced a rumor among the Christians that the “Muslims were
coming.” Even the efforts of the village priest to dissuade them failed to
prevent the Christians from demanding the expulsion of the Muslim from
their village. Finally, an emir intervened and scolded a deputation of Chris-
tian villagers by telling them that such an action “could not be toler-
ated.”62 Although this incident was contained, with each beating or mur-
der in Mount Lebanon, the complete unraveling of society came one step
closer.


[PDF page 153]
The Devil’s Work / 135
communal violence: violence of liberation
In and of themselves such incidents did not produce communal violence.
Rather they created the conditions within which communal violence could
take place by demarcating the geographies of communal safety and danger.
When full-scale communal war occurred in late May of 1860, however, it
was no longer a “civil” conflict but an attempt to physically redefine the
limits of civility and the boundaries of purity. Shahin and the Maronite
Church, Druze warriors and their notables vied with each other to see who
now represented the “true” Christian or Druze nation. The Druze notables
wrote to the European consuls with precisely this message: “each individ-
ual of the Druzes and Christians is not under the eye of surveillance.”63
Here and there, some notables did what they could to prevent the catastro-
phe. Sa‘id Janbulat, for example, protected the Christian Khalil al-Basha,
who was in Dayr al-Qamar on business from Damascus when the troubles
began; he had written to Janbulat requesting help, and Janbulat “at once
sent us five Druze horsemen and five soldiers and we proceeded by night
to Mokhtara [Mukhtara].”64 Janbulat sent his Christian secretary, Yusuf
al-Khuri, to reassure other Christian villages in and around the Shuf dis-
trict. And when the fighting began, several Christian families took refuge
with Shi‘a notables in Jba‘, although Druze fighters (in one case at least)
stormed such havens, defied the would-be protector, “who was unable to
protect them and was even covered with blood himself,” and killed those
inside.65 Arslan emirs also moved to save Christians, and in Hasbayya, Sitt
Nayfa—sister of Sa‘id Janbulat—was praised by the French consul for her
efforts to protect the wives of Christian emirs.66
Such efforts, however, could not disguise the evident breakdown of
mechanisms of social control during the conflict of 1860. The American
missionary William Thomson described the war as “simply a rising of the
people against the wishes of the ruling classes, on all sides.”67 He was right
to the extent that what transpired on the ground was not a skirmish be-
tween the elites. The great social distinction between high and low that had
been the hallmark of the prereform society was temporarily abolished in
the fighting. To Shahin, to the ahali of Zahla, and to the Christians resi-
dent in the mixed districts, not only were the Druzes obviously beyond the
pale, outside the community of Christians, so too were Christians who as-
sociated with Druzes and the elites who had signed alliances with the
Druzes. The flurry of appeals and calls of distress from one region to an-
other in the days and months leading up to and including the summer of
1860 drew meaning from the context of a struggle over rights and property


[PDF page 154]
136 / The Devil’s Work
in which one’s Christianity was meant to take precedence over one’s social
standing and family loyalties. The ahali of Zahla, for example, issued re-
peated appeals for Christian unity to face the “treachery of the [Druze]
wolves” and despaired at the lack of Christian unity and the Patriarch’s in-
ability to assume leadership in a moment of crisis.68 Communal mobiliza-
tion was an attempt to set up a stable community in which Christian rights
would no longer be guaranteed by the elites, many of whom were per-
ceived to have betrayed the cause of Christianity, but by the actions of the
ahali themselves.
To this end, Tanyus Shahin wrote letters urging the Christians of
Mount Lebanon to support the efforts at liberation of their coreligionists in
the Shuf:
You have doubtless heard of the extreme pressure exercised against our
Christian co-religionists living in the Mountain of the Druzes by the
unbelieving community; I have received repeated and urgent applica-
tions for assistance in order to release them from their bondage for
they are besieged; prompted by that religious zeal which is a sacred
duty, I have hastened to move forward with soldiers, and am now en-
camped on the plain of Antilyas, purposing to march at once to the de-
fence of our co-religionists. You must come in a body immediately and
instantaneously, which knowing your zeal, I am confident you will do.
Your brother,
69
Tanious Shaheen [Tanyus Shahin]
In the process, however, Shahin and his men also looted silkworms be-
longing to Christian merchants in Antilyas, and other Christian bands
threatened to loot silk belonging to Bishop Nicolas Murad. How could it
be, despaired one priest writing to the Maronite Patriarch, “that yesterday
we and the wakils asked them to come to fight with the Christians [while
now] they are confiscating their silk? . . . Our fear is not of the loss of an
uqqa (oke) of silk but of the rising of the Christians against one another at
such a time.”70 The justification that Shahin’s men gave for expropriating
the silkworms of a Christian merchant is that he had allegedly bought the
silkworms from the Druzes. Whether this was true was irrelevant: to
Shahin and his followers it was a legitimate to dispossess the merchant for
he was trading in corrupted—i.e., Druze-produced—goods. While Shahin
was proceeding with his ambivalent war of liberation, in which a strike
against the social order was also a sanctioned blow against the enemies of
the faith and those who collaborated with them, the Christians who lived
among the Druzes opted to liberate themselves from their Druze landown-


[PDF page 155]
The Devil’s Work / 137
ers. Nearly two thousand Christian ahali assembled near Jazzin, marched
on two farms owned by the ‘Assaf shaykhs of Niha, and burned them to
the ground.71 If Shahin and other Christians trespassed social boundaries
in their crusade against the Druzes, then Druze villagers also took advan-
tage of the fluid situation to do what was previously unthinkable: they
killed emirs on a scale never before seen in the history of Mount
Lebanon.72
The murder of seventeen Muslim Shihab emirs in Hasbayya by the
Druzes pointed to the social nature of the violence; while Christians were
being slaughtered after a prolonged siege, the Druzes systematically cut
down every Muslim Shihab emir in the town. Within what was the most
cataclysmic moment of religious violence between Druze and Christian lay
the apparent paradox of Druze turning on Muslim notables; chroniclers
have rightly insisted it was because the Shihab emirs defended the Chris-
tians.73 Yet the massacre of the Muslim emirs emphasized the link between
religious violence and the violation of social order that was the hallmark of
1860. The murder of Emir Sa‘d al-Din, for example, was a brief moment
when the bonds of the old-regime social order, of the prohibition against
killing notables, of subservience, of bowing before the ruling classes were
utterly destroyed. It was a moment when the Druze villager, beyond the
“eye of surveillance” of his Druze lords, legitimated with communal logic
what had been the most heinous of crimes in traditional society: the emirs
were killed not because the Ottoman state had decreed their death, not be-
cause of a rivalry between elites, and not because of a tax revolt or some
other violation of duty or obligation. Rather, they were killed because they
had associated themselves with the Christian enemy. The Druze warrior’s
decapitation of Emir Sa‘d al-Din was a blow to the foundation of the old-
regime social order, which had hitherto linked Shihab and Janbulat. Sec-
tarian violence was freed from the accountability of the old regime, and
thus to call it primordial is to miss one of the fundamental breaks that it
represented. In effect, it was the one instant when the pure communal ac-
tor emerged unfettered and unrestrained by any hierarchy before he sank
back into the web of conflicting and contradictory relationships that de-
fined his daily existence.
The case of the Shihab emirs was one such episode when the “enemy”
was unmasked and physically accessible.74 Perhaps, as historians have of-
ten assumed, the Shihabs were slaughtered because they were responsible
for the exile of many Druze notables (although this theory assumes that
the killer of Sa‘d al-Din and his relatives was motivated by feelings of re-
venge); maybe it was because Hasbayya itself was a traditional seat of Shi-


[PDF page 156]
138 / The Devil’s Work
habite power that had actively resisted the Druze advance. Most likely,
however, it was because the name of the Shihabs had become associated
with the Maronite Church’s attempt to create a Christian Mount Lebanon
which excluded the Druzes. Shahin and others legitimated themselves
through a discourse of Christian rights. It is not surprising, then, that the
Druzes responded by making it a point to destroy sacred sites and figures
associated with the enemy. In addition to murdering the Shihabs, the
Druzes killed priests and burned monasteries wherever the Druzes
emerged victorious. In some cases, if the stories in Christian chronicles are
to be believed, the Druzes made the Maronite priests kneel in churches be-
fore they were hacked to death.75 Near Zahla, the Jesuit residence was sin-
gled out and destroyed; five Jesuits were martyred.
The murder of the Jesuits was particularly significant. Beyond the fact
that Jesuits were actively involved in the war effort and beyond the fact
that churches served as gathering points, as centers of the village as well as
the last line of defense in many battles, certain Christian centers were at-
tacked with such ferocity for another reason— one only hinted at in the
chronicles and reports on 1860.76 Among the torrent of rumors was one
that was heard, and denied, by the French consul in Beirut. There was “a
false rumor” circulating among the Druzes, he claimed, that the consulate
of France has authorized and encouraged the mobilization of Christians.
“Through letters, through speech, and through every means available to
me, I have categorically denied this absurd assertion by the Druzes, and I
hope to restore amongst them respect for our flag and the certainty of our
complete neutrality.”77 This rumor of French and, by extension, Jesuit in-
volvement with the Maronites was an important one in outlining for the
Druzes the boundaries of betrayal. To them, France was an outside power
whose support for the Maronites was interpreted as betrayal. France had
sided with Mehmed Ali against the Syrian insurgents of 1840, and, more
recently, Tanyus Shahin was said to have wrapped himself in a French flag.
Notwithstanding the French consul’s remonstrations, the name of France
was linked to incipient Maronite nationalism. This link was expressed
through the Christians hired in the French consulate, the Christians “pro-
tected” by France, and, above all, the flag of France that fluttered above
bastions of purely Christian spaces in Ghazir, Bikfayya, and Ma‘laqa. Not
surprisingly, the Druzes regarded both native and missionary Catholic in-
stitutions as active promoters of the annihilation of the Druze community
and were, therefore, determined to destroy them.78
At the very moment that the united Maronite ta’ifa failed to emerge,
the Druzes eliminated symbols of Christian power whenever and wher-


[PDF page 157]
The Devil’s Work / 139
ever they came across them. Not content with the destruction of churches
and murder of priests, the Druzes wielded the “sword of revenge” (the
phrase used by Christians giving testimony after the war) to erase all
traces of the Maronites in the mixed districts. A Druze account recorded
many years after the war confessed the following:
And the next day, the two Druze armies—those from Niha and those
from ‘Amatur— carried out an attack against the Christian soldiers but
found not a trace of them anywhere since the entire district of Jazzin was
abandoned. The Druzes then turned their attention to the hideouts of
the Christians and their buried treasures in their homes, and there they
found not a little and they extracted what they could; they set fire to all
the villages and farms in the district, and left them like smoldering lava
whose ashes the wind carried into the air, and thus the vast district be-
came a desolate wasteland where only the crows croak and the owls
79
hoot.
To the Druzes, the total cleansing of conquered areas was not a shame-
ful act to be covered up but a moment of exultation because in an era of
rights based on property, on population, and on representation, the elimi-
nation of the Catholic other was the only guarantee of security. For this
reason, perhaps, the massacre of Christians was so intense and was perpe-
trated with such a cavalier attitude. In the massacre of Dayr al-Qamar, for
example, a Druze shaykh was reported (by a Christian chronicler) to have
sat on a chair in the middle of the street, drinking his coffee, chanting joy-
ously, and smoking from a narghile, while Christian victims were brought
to him one by one and slaughtered in front of him. There was quite clearly
no fear of accountability after the war because what was being fought for
by these Druze warriors was not a modification of the old order of things
but a society without Christians.80 As the Druze chronicler wrote, “The
Druzes returned with their emotions overwhelmed by the intoxication of
victory. . . . In the past, the district was filled with its inhabitants; [1860]
was a time that transformed the inhabited to the desolate and turned what
was into what is not in less than a day.”81 The methodical destruction of
Christian villages had another function, however: laying undisputed claim
to land and property that had been a source of tension since 1840. The at-
tacks against refugees on the open roads and the massacres of unprotected
Christians wherever they could be found signified a desire and a need to
eliminate a fear of the unknown, of a possible reprisal, and of a Christian
alliance (which never materialized).82 But this fear should not be dis-
counted or dismissed as part of an age-old hostility; the fear was not of


[PDF page 158]
140 / The Devil’s Work
Christianity per se but of an exclusivist Maronite sectarian consciousness
in its various (and often contradictory) manifestations—a consciousness
that singularly represented to the Druzes a threat to their way of life and
that contested their control of land. Thus, even as they massacred hun-
dreds of Maronites, the Druzes did not pillage the Protestant church in
Hasbayya; they did not attack American missionaries who were not asso-
ciated with the hostile and aggressive Maronite sectarianism.83 Despite the
fact that it lay within their easy grasp, the Druzes did not sack the village
of Bhamdun but heeded the pleas of the resident American missionary to
avoid bloodshed.84
the restoration of social order
The intensity of the violence diminished drastically after the sack of Zahla
and Dayr al-Qamar, the last major Christian centers in the contested sec-
tarian landscape. The Druzes appeared victorious. The mixed districts “be-
longed” to them; the Christians were paralyzed by their defeat, unable to
find an explanation for their repeated failures on the battlefield and, far
more hauntingly, for their failure to rise as a united ta’ifa against the “un-
believing” Druzes. The Druzes effectively destroyed the legend of Tanyus
Shahin, for he was quite unable to protect his brethren in the mixed dis-
tricts from the nakba, or calamity, that befell them. The Maronite envoy in
Rome, Matta Shahwan, wrote to the Patriarch on 23 June in an attempt to
come to terms with the catastrophe. “The Maronite of the Shuf,” he as-
serted, “is considered to be of a different race by the Maronite of Kisrawan,
and the Maronite of the Jubba is like an apostate in the eyes of a Maronite
from the Matn; . . . [thus] there cannot be hope in the success or reform of
this ta’ifa. Does Your Beatitude think that the foreigner will take pity on
the Maronites after he is apprised of their great numbers compared to the
few of their enemy?” Shahwan reflected bitterly on the Maronite defeat:
Till when will the [Maronites] not wake up from their foolishness; . . .
[till when will they not] realize that they are all one tribe, one religion
and that the honor of one of them is the same as that of another. If faith
unites the Christians as one family, should not the belief in Saint Marun
not force them to be in agreement in thought and action for the common
good. Truthfully, it is a bewildering question, how it is that each of the
ta’ifas appreciated the honor of their ta’ifa in our Mountain except our
ta’ifa, which till today has not yet understood this truth. 85
Following the nakba of the Christians in the mixed districts, the unpro-


[PDF page 159]
The Devil’s Work / 141
tected remaining Christians, terrorized by the Druze atrocities all around
them, had little choice but to give up their dreams of liberation and their
faith in the “truth” of the tribalism of the Maronites. After each episode of
violence in 1860, the same scenes repeated themselves: refugees streamed
toward safe havens, and for those remaining behind appeals were made to
traditional Druze notables, who emerged as the only counterweights to to-
tal communal warfare that in its quest for purity seemed to respect no
bounds and no decency. As a result, Christians took refuge in the values of
the old order, but they never knew if indeed they were going to live or die.
In proceedings before an international tribunal set up after the war to in-
vestigate the massacres, the Christian Salim Shawish from Dayr al-Qamar
testified:
[The Druze] Beshir Bey Meraii Abu Neked was in our house. He came
on Wednesday evening, drank coffee and smoked, and afterwards
supped. After supper he said he must leave. We endeavoured to keep him
for our protection, but he said he wished to go as he wished to save some
persons, and to kill others, namely amongst those whom he wished to
kill Nedder Abu Akker. We bribed him with jewels, watches, silver ink-
stands and other things of value to stay, and thus prevailed upon him to
remain till Mohammed Bey Resslan came and saved us; but he, Beshir
86
Bey, made us give him everything we had of value.
As a result of the violence in Hasbayya, for example, Sitt Nayfa became, in
the words of an embittered Christian chronicler, “the absolute despot over
peoples’ property and lives.”87 Sa‘id Janbulat and Sitt Nayfa, both of
whom personified the old regime, became the only hope for the Christians.
It was an ironic end to a Christian quest that had begun in Kisrawan prom-
ising so much liberation.
When the battles between Christians and Druzes raged in the mixed dis-
tricts, the local Ottoman government reacted with the predictability of an
imperial authority utterly unable to come to terms with the subaltern
movements under way. Torn between his superiors in Istanbul and the
consuls of the Great Powers, Hurs¸id Pasha’s immediate concern was to re-
assure both of them that the situation was under control and amenable to
a quick solution. Although he had presented his resignation before the ca-
tastrophe of 1860 because of the lack of effective force at his disposal,
Hurs¸id remained in office. During the fighting, however, Hurs¸id was par-
alyzed by the total breakdown of Ottoman authority. He was aware, more-
over, that rumors were being spread, designed to “cause panic among im-


[PDF page 160]
142 / The Devil’s Work
perial subjects, . . . about our ill-will towards the Christians and of alleged
Ottoman collaboration with the Druzes.”88 The few unpaid Ottoman
troops stationed in Hasbayya and Dayr al-Qamar were simply in no posi-
tion to prevent the fighting, and when faced with a choice between pre-
venting a massacre and saving their lives, they not surprisingly chose to
save their lives; some even joined in the looting, throwing standing orders
to the wind.89
It was only after the fall of Zahla and Dayr al-Qamar that Hurs¸id felt
confident enough to cobble together a “peace” treaty in July between
Druzes and Christians. The treaty is important not because it restored or-
der—the sectarian conflict had already devastated all available targets—
but because it signaled the first concerted effort by the local government
and the local elites to regain the initiative from the local populace and to
restore a semblance of social order. As such, it served two distinct func-
tions. The first was to reinstate an imperial Ottoman authority over the
natives—to once more draw a clear line between the Sultan’s representa-
tives and the Sultan’s subjects and to reinforce a Tanzimat-era notion of
equal imperial distance from all subjects regardless of religious affiliation.
The second was to underscore the illegitimacy of the popular mobilizations
and to reconsecrate a strict sectarian hierarchy. Together, these functions
conspired to “abolish” the memory of the conflict and, with it, the reality
of transgression of social order and the possibility of liberation.
The first function was premised on the notion forwarded by Hurs¸id to
his superiors in Istanbul that what had occurred was entirely consistent
with the “savage nature” of Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants. By situating the
conflict in a primordial landscape, Hurs¸id exonerated himself and his sub-
ordinates from any wrongdoing. “There is nothing new in the events of
the Mountain,” he informed Istanbul. From the beginning of civilization
until now, he stressed, the natives had been divided into one or another set
of factions and had often been a victim of their own “violent customs
(usul-ı anife).”90 Thus, to Hurs¸id, the violence was an age-old problem to
which the natives were perfectly accustomed. Mayhem and massacre, he
intimated, ran in their veins, which as a knowledgeable official he had re-
alized long ago. Yet his requests for additional troops and freedom of ma-
neuver had fallen on deaf ears, both in Istanbul and among the European
consuls in Beirut, who, he hastened to add, were “totally ignorant of the
ways and manners of the Arabs.”91 The specific context for this latest out-
break of hostility, rather than the violence itself, was what perturbed
Hurs¸id: it was his mission, he wrote to the Grand Vizier’s office, to frus-
trate the designs and influence of “foreign agents.” That was the critical


[PDF page 161]
The Devil’s Work / 143
problem he faced, and bringing about peace was the most effective method
for neutralizing their sinister influence on Ottoman affairs.92
While he tried to calm the fears in Istanbul, where European ambassa-
dors were pounding on the Sublime Porte and demanding an immediate
end to the fighting in Mount Lebanon, Hurs¸id also wrote to the Druze and
Christian kaymakams. He reprimanded the notables of both sides. He in-
formed them that “despite our best efforts and expenses over the past year
and a half, our warnings have gone unheeded and those who love peace and
have reason were not listened to.” He added that “the malicious people
who show no compassion towards women and children together with their
accomplices spread the sedition and thus the Druzes and the Christians
have clashed.” The imperative was to show the natives that he was still in
charge and to make sure they understood that it was out of magnanimity
rather than out of any weakness on his own part that he allowed them to
draw up peace accords “in accordance with the traditions and order of the
Mountain.” Nevertheless, he reminded them that from now on “not the
slightest attack on each other is to be tolerated and that each person is to
return home to his property and land, and involve himself in his own af-
fairs.” From now on, he insisted, any failure on the part of the notables
would lead to severe punishment.93
The buyrultu reinforced the illegitimacy of popular participation in pol-
itics. Its aim was to reinscribe social boundaries, to return, as Hurs¸id was
wont to say, each person to “his place” in society. The first and most strik-
ing aspect of the buyrultu issued by Hurs¸id to the Christian side was its
salutation. In contrast to the fluidity of communal violence, where in
many instances the last became the first, Hurs¸id pointedly prefaced his in-
junction for social order by reinstating the “proper” chain of command.
Thus, the decree was issued first and foremost to the “Pride of the Nota-
bles and those Most Honorable, the Kaymakam of the Christians of
Mount Lebanon . . . Emir Bashir [Ahmad].” Next were the “Proud People
of Rank, the Notables and Muqata‘jis of the Christian administration.”
Then came the “Exemplars of Ideal [subjects], the members of the council
of the Kaymakamate,” followed by the respectable among the people and
finally the general population as a whole. After the preamble, Hurs¸id listed
the numerous “bounties” that the Sultan had issued the ahali of Mount
Lebanon, which allowed them to “maintain their privileges of old.” But in-
stead of appreciating them and praying for the continuity of the Sultanate,
“seducers and obstinate ones” (ashab al-ghayat wa al-‘inad) had put in
place the “foundations of sedition,” which led to the destruction of the
country.


[PDF page 162]
144 / The Devil’s Work
Hurs¸id reminded the assembly that because the ahali listened to the
“ones with the [evil] intentions” (dhawi al-ma’arib) discord was spread in
the “years 57 and 61 [1841 and 1845].” Still, the ahali did not “awaken
from their stupidity and ignorance,” and in these times the “corrupt ones”
desired to stir sedition once more in Kisrawan. They were so bold as to or-
ganize wakils inside and outside of Mount Lebanon, and to promote
shaykh shababs in their activities: these, noted Hurs¸id, were the “princi-
pal reasons for the destruction” that ensued. The ahali were seduced by
corruption and did not listen to the “advice of the wise ones [al-‘uqula’].”
Now that peace had been restored, Hurs¸id added, it was up to “you, the
kaymakam, and you, the notables” to take the initiative to disband all
gatherings of the commoners just as it was incumbent on the “ahali to
submit to their notables and to carry on their own affairs, leaving aside
what does not concern them, and especially, taking heed not to listen to the
seduction of the corrupt ones.”94 Hurs¸id’s vitriol against Tanyus Shahin
was barely concealed. That he did not mention him by name was, in all
probability, because he did not want to sully an imperial decree with the
name of the “rebel” he had repeatedly condemned. But Hurs¸id did not
have to name Shahin. He had made his point, just as Abdullah Pasha had
made it years before: politics and public space belonged to the realm of the
elites, who in turn owed absolute obedience to the Sultan. Those of the
ahali who infringed on it were pawns of shadowy conspirators who threat-
ened good government and public order.
The wording of the peace treaty did not differ significantly. By 12 July
1860, Druze and Christian notables, those who valued and cherished their
“nation,” agreed to peace on the principle of mada ma mada, or to let by-
gones be bygones. The purpose was to ensure “that all that has occurred
from the beginning of the events leading up to the general war until now
shall never become a source of litigation or allegation from either side, not
in the present nor in the future.”95 The peace treaty was, to say the least, a
document of remarkable interest: in the space of a few sentences, inter-
spersed between professions of absolute obedience to the Ottoman state
and prayers for the preservation of Ottoman rule, the elites of Mount
Lebanon conspired to write the ahali out of history. As the elites pressed
their seals to the document, some grumbling, others with relief, they
vowed eternal peace with one another. Of course, they did not believe it.
The Christians, and the Maronite Church in particular, resented having to
sign a peace treaty when the battlefield results placed them in so precari-
ous a position.96 But with the large number of Christian refugees in
Kisrawan and under enormous pressure from the European consuls, who


[PDF page 163]
The Devil’s Work / 145
thought that anything was better than continued bloodshed, the Maronite
notables and clergy reluctantly sealed the treaty.
What they did believe in totally was social order. Thus while they may
have halfheartedly agreed to peace with the Druzes and in private letters
sent to one another may have gnashed their teeth at having to submit to
such a humiliation, they were quite happy to forget the events of
Kisrawan, to forget Tanyus Shahin, and to forget the subaltern movement
they had been grappling with in vain for over a year. Indeed all the nota-
bles, Druzes and Maronites, could at least agree on one thing, that the ig-
norant “mobs” who had dominated politics of late could at last be silenced,
that a civility and “nationalist zeal” among the elites could be restored,
that the “nation” should be taken back from those who showed no pity to-
ward children and from the coarseness of the minds of the “juhhal.” Secu-
lar notables, the Church hierarchy, and especially the Khazin lords who
had been unceremoniously evicted from “their” Kisrawan by the ahali
were only too happy to accept the clause in the treaty which stipulated that
“each person was to return to his place . . . and to take back all his property
and lands as it was in the past.”97 So the clock was turned back, and after
nearly two years of sustained “ignorance” the ahali were instructed to
open their eyes again to a Mount Lebanon in which they were slaves to the
Sultan’s will. In one day they went from being masters—perhaps vile,
bloodstained, ambitious, and unrealistic, but still masters— of their own
destiny to having not the slightest say in shaping the world in which they
lived.
To make sure this was exactly what happened, the Sultan himself took
an interest in his far-off province, whose turmoil had disturbed the equa-
nimity of his being. He ordered his minister of foreign affairs, Fuad Pasha,
to hasten to Syria. Not to be outdone, the European powers decided to su-
pervise the restoration of order by sending their own commissioners to aid
in the investigation of the massacres in Syria. The French even sent an
army after news arrived in Europe that riots had occurred in Damascus
soon after the Lebanese notables had sealed their compact. But that is a
story for the next and final chapter, where the terror of the social order, the
fate of Tanyus Shahin, and the production of knowledge about sectarian-
ism as primordial and antimodern are brought together to conclude this
history.
