[PDF page 164]
8 “A Very Old Thing”
F
ew words can express the profound shock that the massacre in Damascus
and the violence in Mount Lebanon produced in Istanbul and in the capi-
tals of the Great Powers of Europe. Stories of rape, the murder of foreign
consuls, and the massacre of missionaries pricked the conscience of Euro-
pean rulers and the reforming Sultan Abdülmecid. In the space of a few
days in July, as rumors of war in Mount Lebanon spread to every corner of
Syria, and amid an economic recession that severely curtailed the region’s
silk and cloth industry, Damascene Muslims, primarily craftsmen and
shopkeepers, rioted and pillaged the Christian quarter of Bab Tuma.1 Al-
though Jews and poorer Christians living in other parts of Damascus were
spared, thousands of Christians were slaughtered in Bab Tuma and hun-
dreds of their houses were plundered. Ottomans and Europeans con-
demned the savage violence of the summer of 1860, but they also ap-
plauded the brutality of Fuad Pasha, who, after agreeing with the European
commissioners on just how many “heads” should roll, inflicted severe
punishment on the Damascenes and on the Druzes of Mount Lebanon in
the autumn of that year.2 They supported Fuad because, quite simply, sec-
tarian violence was deemed primordial behavior that emanated from what
Napoleon III described to his troops (about to embark for Syria) as “the fa-
naticism of a previous century”; the punishment ordered by Fuad was im-
plicitly praised as modern, necessary, and legal and therefore legitimate.3
One, in other words, was seen as an expression of unchanging native
mores, and the other was an example of civility, modernity, and the rule of
law jointly presided over by reforming Ottoman statesmen and European
representatives.4
It is not the purpose of this chapter to dwell on the details of the mas-
sacres and the subsequent tribunal proceedings or to focus on the often ac-
146


[PDF page 165]
“A Very Old Thing” / 147
rimonious imperial rivalries that played themselves out week after week;
nor is it to describe the 357 executions of alleged rioters that took place be-
fore a numbed Damascene public; nor is it to catalogue the hundreds of ex-
iles, the fines, and the conscription that befell the city’s inhabitants.5
Rather, while acknowledging the many differences between the rival com-
missioners and the complexity of the diplomacy that undergirded the
restoration of order in Syria, I focus here on how a knowledge of sectari-
anism as antimodern was produced—how and why the violence of modern
sectarianism in Mount Lebanon was relegated to the domain of tribal fa-
naticism by Fuad Pasha and his European colleagues. Without question,
the horror of the Damascus riots influenced and framed European and Ot-
toman narratives of the rural violence in Mount Lebanon—to the Ot-
tomans, in fact, the Damascus events were far more troubling because of
the city’s symbolic, historical, and religious importance and because the
perpetrators of the massacres were Sunni Muslims. Without question, as
well, both Europeans and Ottomans drew on existing understandings of
Mount Lebanon. The goal of this chapter, therefore, is to illustrate how
Ottoman and European concerns and perceptions coalesced into a discourse
of an avowedly antimodern sectarianism. And, most important, it is to
show how this discourse, which grew out of and justified the terror of pun-
ishment imposed by the Ottoman state in Damascus, masked a final
restoration of an elitist social order in Mount Lebanon and marked the end
of a genuinely popular, if always ambivalent, participation in politics.
the stage of terror
The most important and difficult task Fuad Pasha gave himself was to reaf-
firm the absolute sovereignty of Sultan Abdülmecid in an Ottoman pe-
riphery already incorporated economically, culturally, and even militarily
into European hegemony. Beyond restoring order and minimizing the en-
croachment of the European powers—a task immensely complicated by
the presence of the vainglorious General de Beaufort d’Hautpoul of
France—Fuad attempted to reclaim a monopoly on formal and legitimate
violence from the “ignorant” subjects.6 Among his first acts, in fact, was
warning the Christians of Mount Lebanon in the beginning of October
“that it is not permissible for the subjects to take upon themselves the
right of vengeance, as vengeance and punishment are the prerogatives of
the government.”7
Vengeance and the violence that stemmed from it were within the
purview of the modern state; in place of and above the allegedly “age-old”


[PDF page 166]
148 / “A Very Old Thing”
(kadim ül-cereyan) passions and feuds of its subjects, it was the state, and
more specifically the modern state, that was legitimate in its use of vio-
lence.8 Fuad impressed this simple message on the recalcitrant subjects of
Mount Lebanon. Never for a moment was there any doubt in Fuad’s mind,
nor for that matter in the mind of Halim Pasha, the military commander
in charge of suppressing and “disciplining” the population, that what had
occurred in 1860 did not belong in any way, shape, or form to the modern
world. As one of the great Tanzimat statesmen, Fuad directed his energies
from the outset at trying to reclaim the sullied image of the Empire both at
home and abroad.9 He considered it his duty to represent the “true” Em-
pire—i.e., its center, its reformers, and its Sultan—by excoriating the
“cowardly” local governors who “stained the honor of the Ottoman army”
and by denouncing the “negligent” commanders who “like spectators”
watched the massacre of the Christian subjects in Mount Lebanon take
place before their very eyes.10 This was not simply public posturing to
calm European fears: in confidential dispatches to Istanbul Fuad made the
same point over and over again.11 The modernization of the Ottoman Em-
pire, indeed the viability of the empire itself, was at stake. Fuad insisted
that if nothing were done in the face of the “sedition” in Syria, the Euro-
pean powers would increase their encroachment on Ottoman sovereignty
and the Ottoman state would lose all rights and claims to being a modern
power.
Indeed, although they realized that the French presence in Syria threat-
ened “to bring . . . numerous problems and dangers” to the Ottoman
state, Ottoman officials were aware that the Syrian drama was being
played out on a far larger stage than a provincial one.12 “The world,” con-
fessed Fuad, “awaits the implementation of imperial justice.”13 Fuad saw
the prosecution of the “brigands” (es¸kıyalar) of 1860 as an opportunity to
realign the Ottoman Empire with the concert of Europe; he aimed to steal
the thunder of European criticism of Ottoman “barbarism” by meting out
exemplary modern punishments, for which the European powers and the
sublime will of the Sultan were clamoring.14
In the periphery of the Empire, Fuad made it abundantly clear that the
justification for punishment drew on two separate, yet interlinked, sources.
The first, traditional, was the Sultan’s role as the arbitrator of justice and as
the compassionate ruler. “With great sorrow, disgust, anger and bitter-
ness,” said Fuad to the inhabitants of Damascus, “the Padis¸ah, Hearer of
Justice, has learned of the horrific and abominable acts of murder, plunder
and looting of houses and general assault.”15 The second, however, re-
worked the Sultan’s traditional prerogatives through a discourse of moder-


[PDF page 167]
“A Very Old Thing” / 149
nity. Fuad recast the Sultan’s absolute powers to show how the Tanzimat-
era Sultan, in accordance with the precepts of modern civilization, was
equidistant from all his subjects regardless of their religious persuasion.
He underscored this change in a proclamation issued on 21 September
1860 by claiming that “the cruel treatment that the sedition brought in its
wake in Mount Lebanon on the Christian subjects who are equal in rights
according to the shari‘a [s¸eriat] and the qanun [kanun, secular imperial law
issued by the Sultan] has produced a hurt that aroused the pity of the Im-
perial Majesty, something that is known to all people.”16 Fuad insisted that
punishments drew their legitimacy not simply from the Sultan but from a
modernity to which the Ottoman Empire now laid claim. “Because the
Sublime State never accepts that the slightest harm or aggression should
befall any of the classes of imperial subjects who take shelter under its pro-
tection,” decreed Fuad, “and because the events [that transpired] were con-
trary to the principle of civilization current in the world and beyond the
pale in every manner, the Sublime State, in accordance with its duty to en-
sure justice, has decided to punish those involved in the events.”17
Punishment, therefore, had a moral basis that went beyond tradition.
The instrument of this modern terror was, not surprisingly, the reformed
Ottoman army.18 Historians have often focused on how the Ottoman
army competed with the French army in a race to restore order but have
not seen that an equally important aspect of the deployment of regular
troops was to highlight their modernity and their discipline in contrast
with the alleged anarchy of the natives of Syria. As representatives of
modernity and as equals to the French, the regular Nizam troops deployed
in Syria were exemplars of the modern nation. Fuad reminded the troops:
The ahali of these regions have contradicted the Padis¸ah’s will by caus-
ing sedition and massacres. I have been appointed by our Padis¸ah to be a
commander with you to bring peace and security to this area and to pun-
ish the sins of the group because of their cruel acts. . . . A soldier is the
hand of the Padis¸ah. The Padis¸ah’s hand is justice. He strikes at the op-
pressor. He cares for the oppressed. Let us show everybody what the
worth and value of a soldier is and let all our compatriots
19
[vatandas¸larımız] know our Padis¸ah’s justice.
Without even a hint of irony, Fuad presented an imperial vision of the
Tanzimat to Syria at the point of a bayonet. “Without exception,” he told
the soldiers, “all the imperial subjects are your compatriots [hepsi vatan-
das¸ınızdır].”20 From Fuad’s perspective, the terror about to be unleashed
was professional, orderly, and, above all, redemptive violence sanctioned


[PDF page 168]
150 / “A Very Old Thing”
by state and religion. “In accordance with the law of the s¸eriat [shari‘a],
each of you is required to protect the lives, property, and honor of each of
the imperial subjects without showing any distinction.”21
With Fuad having thus set the stage, reclaimed the image of the Empire
and the mantle of true religion, joined them in a conception of modernity
behind which were, side by side, the Sultan’s soldiers and those of France,
the terror commenced. “Although it seems severe to kill so many men in a
single day, the immensity of the crime and the impact on the world are
such that this kind of great satisfaction and moral punishment are needed,”
wrote Fuad, informing Istanbul of the mass executions of suspected rioters
in Damascus. “It appears inevitable and necessary that for some time [the
city] should be under subjugation.”22 The French concurred, for a Colonel
Osmant admitted by August “that the city is terrified of the Sublime
Porte’s Commissioner.”23 From the standpoint of the inhabitants of Da-
mascus, at least the few notables who left behind a record of the terror as
they saw it, the massacres and the punishments signified a world turned
upside down and a fury that could not be justified by traditional under-
standing. In Damascus, first commoners and then notables were rounded
up, exiled, hanged, and shot. Nobody knew whether their turn was next,
when they would be denounced and hauled off to an uncertain fate. A
Damascene judge’s diary tells of how the exiles were forced to march man-
acled from the early morning till they reached Beirut, where the Chris-
tians taunted them by calling out, “Where are your swords now? They’re
taking you to the hangman’s rope, and tomorrow we are going to Damas-
cus; we have kicked you out and are taking your homes.”24 True or not,
such stories indicated the alienation felt by the Muslims of the city at a
time when the “fear and tribulation increased upon all the Muslims.”25
The Druze shaykhs in Mount Lebanon were forced to flee for their lives af-
ter several among them, including Sa‘id Janbulat, had obeyed Fuad Pasha’s
summons only to find themselves in jail. Those who escaped were hunted
down as “rebels.” Their propery was confiscated, their livestock and wood
commandeered. The Druze district of partitioned Mount Lebanon was
abolished, and the area was put under martial law.26 Torture was report-
edly used to extract confessions.27 Meanwhile, Fuad boasted that hundreds
were arrested in Ottoman raids so efficient that “not even a blade of grass
was disturbed” and “not a pip was heard.”28 The Christians, under the pro-
tection of France, were left untouched.
Nevertheless, in the application of terror the vaunted modernity of
Fuad’s campaign revealed itself to be not nearly as seamless and as orderly
as it might have appeared in metropolitan circles: behind the much ap-


[PDF page 169]
“A Very Old Thing” / 151
plauded punishment of the “savages” of Syria stood the ugly truth of a
systemic violence that the rioters never possessed. It was, at heart, a rather
crude terror intended to silence the population, born not out of a sense of
frustration or alienation but out of a deliberate, imperial policy that set out
to “discipline” the masses of Syria. The terror masked an essentially reac-
tionary goal: to banish the subaltern from politics once and for all and to
reconstitute the broken lines of hierarchy by recovering the meaning of
Europe and the Tanzimat from popular understanding. Given the over-
whelming military might at his disposal and the exhaustion and despair of
the local population following war’s end, Fuad marched into Mount
Lebanon unopposed, indeed openly welcomed by the Christian elites, to
administer justice indeed but also to deliver the deathblow to popular in-
terpretations of Ottoman reform.
the production of knowledge
The most sustained effort to depict sectarian mobilization as part of the
premodern occurred within this context of terror. Discipline and punish-
ment went hand in hand with a production of knowledge about sectarian-
ism that simultaneously absolved the Ottoman state and the European
powers of any responsibility for the troubles and limited the conflict to an
allegedly tribal sectarian landscape removed both physically and tempo-
rally from metropolitan centers. Unlike S¸ ekib Efendi’s and Hurs¸id Pasha’s
solutions to a conflict, which were based on the mada ma mada principle,
Fuad’s goal was not to abolish the past but to make a clean break with it.
The ostensible aim was not to forget the recent violence or to pretend that
nothing had occurred but to punish and to bring some closure to the events
and create a lasting memory of a modern empire in its periphery. Yet the
underlying principle in 1860 was much the same as it had been in 1845: to
restore social order. The goal was to reinscribe the meaning of reform
within a hierarchical conception of a society that flowed, much as the pun-
ishments did, from an imperial center to the periphery in an arbitrary and
absolute manner.29
The course of justice followed a simple formula in Mount Lebanon. Ac-
cording to Fuad Pasha and his European colleagues, the average sectarian
combatant could not have been acting of his or her own volition. Someone,
they felt, must have been behind the violence, for as the British consul re-
marked at the outset of the conflict, “It cannot for a moment be supposed
that a handful of unsupported peasants would venture to defy the author-
ity of the Porte.”30 The ahali acted not out of any awareness or political


[PDF page 170]
152 / “A Very Old Thing”
consciousness but out of a supposedly primordial instinct. The commonly
accepted view among those investigating the unrest was that popular sec-
tarian violence was irrational and instinctive; at best, it was brigandage.
For the urbane and educated Fuad, this belief made sense because it tapped
into—but also went beyond—a classical Ottoman ruling ideology that
equated the good subject with the obedient and quietist subject. For the
ahali to move into the domain of disobedience someone must have ap-
pealed to their simple and savage passions. Fuad’s reports repeatedly ac-
cused the ahali of acting out a “very old thing” (pek eski bir s¸ey) and “an
ancient struggle” (münafese-i kadime).31
Despite the vehement disagreements among themselves over the scale
of punishment and over which side started the war, the European commis-
sioners had to concur with Fuad. The tribunal representatives agreed that
what had occurred in Mount Lebanon “was an inevitable consequence of
the customs of their lands.” Moreover, the British commissioner was ut-
terly adamant about not using a “standard of justice” appropriate to Eu-
rope to evaluate the crimes of “ignorant peasants” who “blindly” followed
the corrupting visions of their leaders.32 Lord Dufferin, the British com-
missioner on the tribunal, confessed that “Syria is inhabited by ten distinct
and uncivilized races, and that these races are split up into seventeen fa-
natical sects.” The “lawless and unruly” Druzes and Maronites, he argued,
were “tribes” whose recent behavior was compatible with their nature.33
The British ambassador to Istanbul agreed. “I think,” he said, “it is not to
be wholly put of sight that if one barbarous people attack another, that
other is likely to repel such attack in a barbarous manner: and that what
passes amidst such people cannot be judged entirely in reference to the cus-
toms, manners, opinions, and civilization of the refined States of the West
of Europe.”34 The Austrian envoy emphatically denied that the Druzes
even had the right to “carry the title of ‘nation.’”35
The commissioners and Fuad Pasha insisted on evoking a tribal land-
scape over which the rationality of modern civilization could not be
brought to bear to justify or explain the violence. This formulation begged
the question of who then was culpable, if not the savage mountaineers.
They agreed on one point, that blame should fall on the elites, although
they disagreed on the differing degrees of guilt that separated the local Ot-
toman government from the local notables and clergy. From the outset, the
Ottoman government maintained that there was simply no evidence to try
the local governor and his administration on any grounds except, possibly,
negligence. Hurs¸id, for example, was accused of having let himself “fall
under the [pernicious] influence” of the locals and was subsequently ban-


[PDF page 171]
“A Very Old Thing” / 153
ished.36 The Turkish governor of Dayr al-Qamar was executed on the
grounds that “he had failed in his duty to repulse by force the plundering,
pillaging and murdering brigands who had attacked the Christians in the
presence of [Ottoman] soldiers.”37 Tahir Pasha, who was sent by Hurs¸id
during the war to separate the two sides, was also interrogated and sen-
tenced to life imprisonment because he was lulled by the “false promises”
of the Druze notables and thus did not immediately disperse the Druze
fighters or the Christians from Kisrawan whom he had encountered.38
Fuad Pasha’s efforts to shift blame (if not ultimate responsibility) for the
events away from the local government left the local elites as the only pos-
sible culprits. They, in effect, became the scapegoats of an imperial wisdom
that could not fathom the idea of rational, autonomous popular activity
that contradicted the entire structure of (theoretically) benevolent and pa-
triarchal Ottoman rule. They also became scapegoats of a colonial Euro-
pean wisdom that refused to accept the popular and reformist character of
sectarian mobilizations and that preferred arguments that were firmly
rooted in a premodern tribal landscape. The local elites and the provincial
Ottoman government were made to pay the entire price for the cata-
strophic consequences that stemmed, in large part, from the European-Ot-
toman decision to partition Mount Lebanon. To a certain extent, this out-
come was to be expected given the presumptions and claims that had been
made over the past two decades by Christian and Druze elites representing
their respective ta’ifas. The outcome was, if nothing else, an ironic process
of accountability in which Druze and Maronite squabbles over the division
of postrestoration spoils came back to haunt them. They were held to their
word and to their self-styled proclamations of being leaders of nations. But
in 1860 their nations had betrayed them in myriad ways: in disobedience,
in their failure to materialize at the right time and at the right place, in the
excesses they committed, and in their general uncontrollability. Fuad
claimed that the Maronites “under the influence of their spoiled [by kind
treatment] and notoriously self-serving spiritual leaders” began the con-
flict by attacking the Druzes and the local government.39 The British, for
their part, denounced what they saw as the intrigues of Bishop ‘Awn,
whom they accused of being an “unscrupulous Prelate, whose ambition
and passion for intrigue verify one’s conception of the worst specimen of a
medieval eclesiastic.”40 And yet it was not the Maronite priests who were
brought to trial but the Druze notables; they were left without any effec-
tive patron to shield them from the terror of imperial justice.
Their punishment, in fact, was based on an 1858 Ottoman penal code
that had been copied from a French code.41 The logic of the Ottoman code


[PDF page 172]
154 / “A Very Old Thing”
itself made it necessary to pinpoint the “ringleaders” of the seditious
movement. Sa‘id Janbulat, for example, was condemned to death on ex-
actly these grounds: “Because of the events that transpired in the Moun-
tain [Lebanon], Sa‘id Janbulat, the Druze emir on trial . . . despite his de-
nial of the crimes attributed to him has been found [guilty] of attacking
subjects of the Ottoman State and of putting himself in a state of rebellion
having led the rebels, and thus according to articles 55, 56 and 57 of the Im-
perial Penal Code he has been sentenced to death.”42
Without question, the Ottoman prosecution of what Fuad called the
“véritables diables” elaborated on a venerable discourse of the Druze as
brigand.43 But it reworked this discourse by emphasizing the legal basis for
their prosecution, which lay in a regularized body of laws that were appro-
priated from one of the great modern nations of the day. The articles
specifically mention the “causing of sedition” or “instigation” and “incite-
ment” as reasons for punishment. Because of these crimes, Sa‘id Janbulat
had placed “himself in a state of rebellion” against the Ottoman state.
Nothing could have been farther from the truth as far as Janbulat was con-
cerned. But the importance lies not in the truth of these accusations but in
their emergence at all. Fuad reminded the Ottoman commissioner at the
tribunal that “the heads which must fall . . . are those of men, who because
of their social standing, exercised a grievous influence on the masses, or
who, because of the sheer number and atrocity of their crimes, caused the
most harm to humanity.”44
The trial and punishment of the Druze notables, furthermore, went a
long way toward satisfying what Fuad described as the “public conscience
of the civilized world.”45 It restored the metaphor of sultanic benevolence
so rudely violated in the tumult of 1860. It reassembled a broken social or-
der. Most important, it affirmed Fuad Pasha’s unshakable view that be-
longing to and being part of a modern Ottoman society, or hems¸ehrilik
(literally, compatriotship), meant embracing social order, accepting one’s
station in life, and bowing without question before the will of the Sultan.
What put Sa‘id Janbulat “in rebellion” was his dereliction of duty and of
his responsibility to restrain and control his followers. The other Druze
notables were accused of the same crimes and indicted under the same ar-
ticles. Husayn Talhuq was condemned to death because although he was a
muqata‘ji and was “therefore required to protect the Christians of his dis-
trict and to prevent the Druzes of his district from engaging in aggression,
he, on the contrary, was found to be a leader of the seditious and rebellious
groups who attacked the subjects of the Sublime State.”46 Implicit in all
these accusations, but spelled out clearly in the reports and memoranda


[PDF page 173]
“A Very Old Thing” / 155
that led up to the punishments, was a conviction that the ahali’s entrance
into politics was necessarily primordial rather than conscious, manipulated
rather than autonomous, and conspiratorial rather than spontaneous.
It was one thing to believe in an elite-led movement, to blame the spir-
itual leaders of the Maronites and to prosecute the Druze notables, but it
was another thing to prove these charges, especially given the flat refusal
of the Druze leaders to acknowledge any responsibility for what had oc-
curred.47 The gathering of evidence, therefore, was a crucial step in the
production of knowledge about sectarianism as a primordial current ma-
nipulated by Druze notables to terrible effect. This insistence on evidence
again seemed to highlight the distinction that Fuad was desperate to un-
derline between modern, legal, and methodical punishment and tribal
“sedition.” Yet the procurement of evidence also demonstrated the reac-
tionary nature of modern punishment. The interrogation of Druze nota-
bles and local officials exemplified the logic of a few men, who were con-
vinced of the existence of an elite conspiracy that would explain the
resurgence of tribal passions. These men framed the entire proceedings
around a single question: who was the ringleader of the conspiracy? As
stated by the tribunal itself, their aim was “to investigate the origin and
causes of the events of which Syria was a theatre; to determine the respon-
sibility of the chiefs of the insurrection, as well as the agents of the [local]
administration, and to proceed with the punishment of the guilty.”48
To this end, man after man was arrested and hauled before two separate
tribunals, an Ottoman military court martial that dispensed justice in the
name of the Sultan and the international tribunal that was meant to over-
see and help in the investigations. Summoned before Turkish officers who
hailed from the highest echelons, before a foreign minister whom they
knew of by name but had never seen, and before European commissioners
including Lord Dufferin, who at the age of twenty-one assumed himself to
be an expert on the affairs of “tribal” Syria because he had spent some time
shooting crocodiles on the Nile, the Druze notables and local officials came
face to face with an uncertain fate.49 When the local officials and Druze no-
tables were interrogated before these men, the questions were none too
subtle. For example, Ahmed Efendi, the emlak müdürü (director or prop-
erties and real estate, bailiff) of Beirut, was asked bluntly why he held “se-
cret meetings” with Vasfi Efendi, who was the kethüda, or secretary, of
Hurs¸id Pasha.50 He was also asked why he had misled “the Pasha by sug-
gesting to him to go to Hazmiyya and not to fire on the Druzes.” To such
a line of questioning, Ahmed Efendi could only exclaim: “A person like
Hurs¸id Pasha cannot be deceived. Who am I to lead him into error? The


[PDF page 174]
156 / “A Very Old Thing”
Pasha was not a newcomer to government. He had been here for three
years. He had absolutely no need for my advice. I neither advised him to
go to Hazmiyya nor did I tell him not to fire on the Druzes.” His denial
notwithstanding, Ahmed was stripped of his rank and imprisoned, having
been found guilty by the Ottoman tribunal of giving “moral support” to
the Druzes based on the testimony of Christians and of the European con-
suls.51
The Druze notable Husayn Talhuq’s interrogation sheds even more
light on the desire of the commissioners to uncover the alleged conspiracy.
Talhuq was asked, “Why did you not prevent the Druses of your
Mookataah [muqata‘a] from taking part in the civil war of the Lebanon?”
The Druze notable denied involvement. “We never left our Mookataah,”
he replied. The commissioners said, “You must have known, as a Mook-
tagee what the feeling of the people was before the civil war broke out.”
Talhuq, drawing on a wellspring of old-regime language, answered that
“all the people of our Mookataah being farmers, they entertain no opin-
ions.” In reference to a separate incident, the court demanded to know why
Talhuq carried arms during the war. “How could I go about without my
arms, especially when the Christians had two days before killed two re-
spectable Druses?” Frustrated, the court asked, “Have you never been
present at any battle?” Talhuq said he hadn’t. “Who were the chiefs [ring-
leaders] of the Druses on the occasion?” asked the interrogators. “They
had no chiefs,” was all Talhuq would say. He was condemned to death.52
When it came to Sa‘id Janbulat, the Ottoman investigators left no stone
unturned. Yet all they came up with was a letter written by Janbulat urg-
ing the Christians of Jazzin to stay calm because he would protect them, as
well as promises—retrospectively seen as deception—he had made to
Tahir Pasha and other officers to maintain order.53 The most damning piece
of “evidence” they found against him was his association with the leader of
the Hawran Druzes, Sa‘id Atrash, who had been received by Janbulat dur-
ing the fighting.54 Failing, however, to find any direct evidence that impli-
cated him in the massacres and confronted by the fact that Janbulat had
procured for himself testimony of good conduct from both Christian vil-
lagers and Ottoman officers during the war of 1860, the Ottomans turned
to the naturally embittered Christian refugees. Homeless and destitute,
women and old men accused Janbulat of having organized their expulsion
from Mount Lebanon. They swore that whatever testimony Janbulat pos-
sessed had been gained from them under duress.55 While the Christian tes-
timony against Janbulat was entirely understandable and may even have
been credible, the testimony of two Ottoman officers after the war was not


[PDF page 175]
“A Very Old Thing” / 157
credible. Although these officers had given previous testimony in favor of
Janbulat, and although Hurs¸id Pasha had earlier acknowledged Janbulat’s
efforts in trying to reestablish order, the officers suddenly decided,
doubtlessly under pressure from Fuad Pasha, that they had been coerced
and deceived by Janbulat.56 Both men turned in identically worded retrac-
tions of their previous testimony.
Regardless of the source of the evidence brought to bear against him,
Sa‘id Janbulat was found guilty in large part because of his rank as the
“foremost and most esteemed” (en büyük ve mu‘teber) Druze notable.57
His death sentence, more than any other, was symbolic of the Ottoman ap-
proach to the conflict of 1860: social standing was equated with knowledge
and therefore with culpability. The approach of Fuad and the international
commissioners had been from the outset to find the “guilty” persons who
had allegedly caused the fitna, or sedition. In the Druze notables, especially
in Sa‘id Janbulat, who was to die in jail, they found their scapegoats. Be-
cause of their social position rather than any actual crimes they had com-
mitted, these men were made to expiate the sins of others and absolve the
Ottoman state and the European powers of any responsibility.
ending kisrawan
Ottoman justice was expressed through the metaphor of the Sultan’s pain
and sadness. Punishment of guilty notables and local officials, including
Hurs¸id, who was banished, was meant to cure society of an inner illness, of
the lapse of the higher, thinking, and rational classes in controlling the
supposedly unruly, ignorant, and irrational lower ones. Punishment was
aimed at redrawing the social boundaries that divided notables from the
ahali. It was meant to emphasize that a healthy, modern nation could and
would compete with Europe not simply in the military and bureaucratic
spheres (the Tanzimat army and Fuad Pasha being embodiments of these)
but also in a moral sphere, for the pain “felt” by the Sultan affected more
than his traditional Muslim identity—it accentuated his newer Tanzimat
identity as a monarch among monarchs in a civilized family of nations. In
the final analysis, punishment was supposed to restore societal balance in
much the same way as Hurs¸id Pasha’s mada ma mada treaty was—with
one crucial difference, namely that the violence was to be put in the past,
while society moved forward. To accomplish this process, each person was
to return to his occupation, to resist the temptation of evildoers to join in
future sedition, and to wait for and obey imperial proclamations when they
were issued.58


[PDF page 176]
158 / “A Very Old Thing”
Nowhere was this more evident than in Kisrawan. Together despite the
mistrust that would normally have pushed them far apart, the Ottoman
state, the European consuls, and the local elites jointly turned their atten-
tion to dealing with the final impediment to a full restoration of social or-
der. Tanyus Shahin himself was never mentioned by name by Fuad. In-
stead the movement in Kisrawan which Shahin led, like the sectarian
violence that followed it, was removed from the world of modern con-
sciousness and banished to the realm of the irrational. Described, instead,
as fevza (anarchy) and heyecan (excitement) by the Ottoman government,
the Kisrawan rebellion was first stripped of its social meaning and then
crushed militarily.59 Moreover, the Maronite Patriarch, backed by the
might of two armies and the ambition of Yusuf Karam, a Christian notable
appointed as a temporary kaymakam by Fuad Pasha, suddenly found the
courage to threaten excommunication of the impoverished Maronites who
still refused to give the Khazins back their property.60
In truth, however, Shahin’s position was already precarious. He was
surrounded by a destitute population of refugees for whom he could do
nothing, a clergy that had long since lost patience with him, notables who
detested his very name, and an Ottoman state that refused even to utter it.
Shahin personified the wilting of a popular movement. A victim of his own
pretensions, a leader of a phantom Christian army and an even more elu-
sive Christian ahali, Shahin accepted Bishop ‘Awn’s urging to end the
Kisrawan rebellion. Accordingly, the bek and the representatives of the
major villages in Kisrawan together solemnly declared on 29 July 1860
their absolute submission and obedience to the Sultan’s will. In and of itself
this declaration was not new—for they had never considered themselves
rebels against the state—nor was their insistence that the Khazins were
free to return to their properties. What was new was their total repudiation
of the legitimacy of their popular movement, which they now referred to
as a course of sedition foisted on them by insidious “men of corruption.”61
Yusuf Karam’s move in March of 1861 to oust Shahin from Kisrawan was,
therefore, a fitting end to a drama that had seen, over the past two years,
common people appropriate the meaning of reform in the cause of social
liberation.62 Karam marched on Rayfun, and, after a skirmish with
Shahin’s partisans, he occupied the village and looted Shahin’s home. The
erstwhile leader of the Kisrawan revolt fled.63 Three weeks later, during
General de Beaufort d’Hautpoul’s tour of Kisrawan, Shahin resurfaced to
beg the French commander to intercede on his behalf with Karam. He was
willing to submit unconditionally. He was tired, a pathetic shadow of his
former self and stripped of what once appeared to be limitless bravado. The


[PDF page 177]
“A Very Old Thing” / 159
general obliged, and under the auspices of the French Lazarists a reconcili-
ation was held between Shahin, the muleteer wh had help turn a world up-
side down, and Karam, who sought to restore things right side up. Under
the watchful eye of France, the two men agreed to forget the past.64 One
might say two visions were represented that day, one of reinvigorated elites
keen to put the memories of the Kisrawan rebellion and 1860 behind them
and eager to regain their “rightful” share in local politics, and the other of
a spent populace that was unsure of its place in postwar society and unable
to remove itself from the shadow of 1859 and 1860, where it had enjoyed
its finest, yet saddest, hour.
defining a culture of sectarianism
The story of sectarian violence in Mount Lebanon came to a close with the
reestablishment of social order. After considering a number of proposals,
including the mass transfer of Druzes out of Mount Lebanon, the Euro-
pean commissioners and the Ottoman government finally agreed on the
creation of the Mutasarrifiyya of Mount Lebanon on 9 June 1861. The par-
tition decision of 1842 was rescinded and replaced by a proclamation of an
autonomous government that would be ruled by a non-Lebanese Christian
governor answerable directly to the Sublime Porte.65 On the face of it, the
rank of muqata‘ji was abolished. What the Ottoman authorities consid-
ered to be the most corrupt facet of notable society was finally, on paper at
least, destroyed. “All are equal before the law” read the sixth article of the
protocol. Measures were taken to combat administrative corruption, create
an efficient and professional police force, and rationalize taxation.66
In more than one sense, the solution defined the problem at hand.
Given to bouts of supposedly primordial intercommunal violence, outside
the mainstream of Sunni Ottoman society, the ahali of Mount Lebanon
were nevertheless protected by Europeans and, as a result, were different
and more privileged than subjects in other Ottoman provinces. Unable to
ignore European interest in this “special” province, the Ottomans hoped to
show that their role in Mount Lebanon would henceforth be that of an ac-
tive modernizer; they would rule the province directly rather than leaving
it to the mercies of corrupt local elites. The creation of the Mutasarrifiyya
was a declaration of Ottoman intent to seal off the wellsprings of alleged
tribal discontent. Fuad Pasha intimated as much when he tied the promul-
gation of new rules in Mount Lebanon to security, public order, and the
government’s devotion to “stability and progress” (sebat ve terrakisine
dahi hasr-ı ikdam-ı tamm olunmakda).67 That the governor had to be


[PDF page 178]
160 / “A Very Old Thing”
Christian and that the European powers had to agree to his appointment
did not contradict the thrust of Ottoman administration. Rather, it reaf-
firmed what was evident from the outset of Fuad Pasha’s mission, namely
the desire to work in tandem with the Europeans to bring civility and
modernity to an allegedly unmodern province. This task was embodied in
Tanzimat laws and was representative of an Ottoman sovereignty playing
on a world stage. The presentation of the proclamation of the Mutasarri-
fiyya symbolized this task perfectly. There, on the tenth day of Muharram,
Thursday, 18 July 1861, having summoned the local elites and notables and
invited the European consuls—albeit only with the rank of “mere specta-
tors” (cümlesine bir seyirci rengi verilmek)—Fuad Pasha “made under-
stood” (tefhim ve is¸aat olunarak) the meaning of the new order of
things.68At the ceremony, Turkish-speaking Ottoman officials, flanked by
French, British, Austrian, Prussian, and Russian representatives, had the
proclamation read in Arabic to the assembled crowd of notables and es-
teemed “faces” of local society. All was ordered. All was deliberated be-
forehand, methodical, absolute, and without any doubt or contradiction.
All was, needless to say, in stark contrast to the perceived anarchy on the
ground that led to the creation of the Mutasarrifiyya.
It was a spectacle that launched a new culture of sectarianism, marred
only by the wailing of Christian widows, who reminded those gathered of
the urgency of their self-appointed task to steer Mount Lebanon toward
modernity.69 Notables, European consuls, and Ottoman dignitaries joined
together in an impressive display of pomp and circumstance that quite lit-
erally reconstituted the lines of social order. Once more, the Ottoman state
positioned itself as the only legitimate mediator between different social
and sectarian communities and, more crucially, as the only legitimate in-
terpreter of the meaning of reform. The occasion coincided with the ascen-
dance of a new Sultan to the throne, which helped underscore the rebirth
and renewal of Ottoman power.70 More than ever before, Ottoman au-
thority—personified in the persons of Fuad Pasha and Davud Pasha, the
first governor of the reorganized province— distanced itself from the ordi-
nary inhabitants who had been so bold as to conflate the reformation of the
Ottoman Empire with social and communal liberation. Their duty, stated
the new governor, was to return to their station in society. Otherwise, they
would be faced with the terrible power of the Ottoman state.71
Outside Beirut, Fuad Pasha turned over the reins of absolute power to
Davud. An Armenian Catholic who had been educated in a French school,
had studied jurisprudence, and had joined the foreign ministry, Davud
was, like his superior, Fuad Pasha, an Ottoman personification of the Tan-


[PDF page 179]
“A Very Old Thing” / 161
zimat. Fluent in French, German, and, of course, Turkish, Davud Pasha
spoke little Arabic.72 Furthermore, his mandate was given without the
slightest input from or regard for the wishes of the imperial subjects, who
were quite simply presented with the fait accompli of the new Mount
Lebanon. Davud was a Christian indeed, but one who embodied official Ot-
toman thinking, which refused to acknowledge a popular basis or dimen-
sion to reforms.
If nothing else, the Mutasarrifiyya was exact. The Règlement Or-
ganique gave precise borders to the new province, which was to include six
separate districts. The first was the Kura district, whose inhabitants were
mostly Orthodox Christians. The second was the northern part of Mount
Lebanon that lay between Kura and Nahr al-Kalb (i.e., Kisrawan). The
third was Zahla and its environs. The fourth was the Matn and the Sahil,
inhabited mostly by Christians. The fifth was the area south of the Beirut-
Damascus carriageway up until Jazzin, and the sixth was Jazzin and Iqlim
al-Tuffah.73 In short, a new map was created that finally erased the ge-
nealogical geography of the old regime. In addition, the fourteenth article
of the proclamation stipulated that any person convicted of committing a
crime outside Mount Lebanon who sought refuge within Mount Lebanon
would have to be turned over to the appropriate authorities. The implica-
tion was clear enough: the article undermined one facet of the notable
privilege of hospitality, which had long irritated Ottoman governors chaf-
ing at their inability to apprehend those whom they saw as “brigands.”74
Scholars have rightly emphasized the centralizing aspect of these mea-
sures and the significant ruptures with the past that they heralded. They
see 1860 as a break, a natural demarcation of historiography that signified
Mount Lebanon’s full incorporation into imperial politics and a world econ-
omy.75 However, by focusing entirely on the new administrative or eco-
nomic aspects of the Règlement Organique, historians have overlooked the
continuity inherent in the document and in the intent behind its produc-
tion. By the admission of its own crafters, the Règlement was meant to be
the climax of a period of flux and a reconsecration of the sectarian order set
in place in 1845. Faced with the contradictions and ambiguities of S¸ ekib
Efendi’s regulations, the Règlement tried to create a rational, workable,
and, above all, elitist sectarian system.
Every article in the Règlement indicated that this new order was to be
sectarian. European and Ottoman diplomats responsible for drawing up
the Règlement attempted to separate the population as much as possible
and, as is evident in the fifth article of the Règlement, to create religiously
homogenous administrative units. In the wake of the 1860 war, the com-


[PDF page 180]
162 / “A Very Old Thing”
bined wisdom of the European and Ottoman negotiators, who spent long
hours in Istanbul belaboring each and every point of the Règlement, forced
on the inhabitants a single public identity, where one’s sect defined one’s
involvement in the public sphere and one’s ability to be appointed to office,
to govern, to collect taxes, to punish, even to live and exist as a loyal sub-
ject. A census was ordered, in accordance with the seventeenth article of
the Règlement, to be carried out “place by place, and sect by sect.”76 Thus
the significance of the often-cited sixth article, which stated that “all are
equal before the law, and all privileges, including those of the muqata‘jis,
are abolished,” is not, as is often assumed, that it abolished so-called feu-
dalism. Rather, it attempted to juridically replace a nonsectarian elite cul-
ture with a sectarian one that emphasized the important role that disci-
plined, reformed, and coopted elites could and indeed had to play in the
process of restoring an Ottoman social order.
Notable society survived its own formal abolition; it persisted and even
developed a new and modernized form which still dominates Lebanon to-
day.77 The Règlement explicitly excluded popular elements from govern-
ment by stating, in the eleventh article, that “all members of the courts
and administrative assemblies will be chosen and appointed by the leaders
of their sect in agreement with the notables of the sect.”78 By a sleight of
imperial and colonial hand, with the full approval of the notables, and
dampened only by the reluctance of the Maronite Church to abandon its
invented “tradition” of a Maronite Shihabite dynasty, an elite political cul-
ture was reconsecrated.79 Indeed, the only legitimate form of public exis-
tence for the majority of Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants was as deferential,
obedient, passive, tax-paying imperial subjects.
The irony, of course, is that the Ottomans never intended for this sec-
tarian order to become a nationalist blueprint. When Fuad Pasha remarked
that “all must, as an individual or a sect, carry out the duties of fraternity
and those of the nation,” he was referring to the Ottoman state.80 The Rè-
glement was a weapon against the disease of separatist nationalism— or, in
the case of Mount Lebanon, what was perceived to be the destructive will
to tribalism—that was steadily eating away at the periphery of the empire
before Fuad’s eyes.81 Time and again he reminded the local inhabitants that
the new order was unveiled “to encourage unity and love of the nation.”82
Time and again, he insisted that the notables must “go to [Davud Pasha]
and must strive to fulfill their duties of loyalty and obedience in carrying
out the orders of the Sublime Sultanate.”83 Fuad Pasha assumed that the
sectarian arrangements could, if needed, be fine-tuned in Istanbul; he
hoped that a link between center and periphery would ensure that the im-


[PDF page 181]
“A Very Old Thing” / 163
perial subjects always had a recourse beyond local power brokers and
would check elite ambitions. The new order of Mount Lebanon was a
showcase of the Tanzimat, insofar as it presented only one centralized un-
derstanding of reform. Not surprisingly, local interpretations of the Tanzi-
mat, as well as popular participation in politics, which were at the heart of
the recent events, found their diametric opposite in the absoluteness, the
distance, the authority, and the order personified by Fuad Pasha in the af-
termath of 1860.
Underlying the Ottoman restoration of order was a refusal to acknowl-
edge any implications that may have been lurking within the tangle of sec-
tarian mobilizations for the course of imperial reform and, ultimately, for
citizenship in the Empire. The edict that announced the new order in
Mount Lebanon boldly asserted that Fuad Pasha had succeeded in “erasing
the traces of the painful event” of 1860.84 This Ottoman exercise in delib-
erate amnesia—which presumed to represent and silence thousands of im-
perial subjects whose lives and memories were obviously and indelibly at-
tached to the events of 1860 —was motivated, no doubt, by a genuine
attempt to rebuild trust and to lay the foundations for a cohesive society.
But it also reflected an untidy effort to sweep under the rug all the contra-
dictions of modernity in an age of European hegemony. Fuad Pasha re-
turned to Istanbul and left the inhabitants of Mount Lebanon (and the Ot-
toman governors sent to rule them) to sort out the complexities of reform
and to reconcile the tensions between communal and individual represen-
tation, religious and social equality, and European power and Ottoman
sovereignty. Mount Lebanon enjoyed a “long peace” (as Engin Akarlı puts
it) under Ottoman stewardship that lasted until the First World War. But
it was a peace constrained within an inherently unstable and highly am-
bivalent sectarian culture.
In the aftermath of 1860, a culture of sectarianism developed in the
sense that all sectors of society, public and private, recognized that the war
and the massacres marked the beginning of a new age—an age defined by
the raw intrusion of sectarian consciousness into modern life. At a public
level, the discourse of sectarianism permeated all facets of administration,
law, education, and, finally, with the establishment of the Lebanese repub-
lic, the state. Mount Lebanon continued to be haunted by the possibility of
renewed religious violence, and consequently there emerged a political cul-
ture determined to “forget” the trauma of 1860. This culture depended,
and still depends, on a myth of communal homogeneity—that there is
such a thing as a Maronite or a Druze nation that can or should be repre-
sented—and on a myth of traditional religious tolerance and harmony, all


[PDF page 182]
164 / “A Very Old Thing”
the while minimizing or ignoring the fact that such harmony undergirded
an utterly rigid and often violent notable hierarchy. Paradoxically, this cul-
ture reproduces and justifies itself as a “balance of communities,” but it
also witnesses repeated contestations (at both elite and popular levels) over
the control, and hence meaning, of each sectarian community.85 The cul-
ture of sectarianism dominates, as well, the private world of citizens. It en-
compasses, beyond the eye of state surveillance, a range of aspirations,
fears, and beliefs that as often contradict as reinforce the public culture of
sectarianism. It forces all citizens to make a basic choice, either to resist or
to support sectarianism— either to believe in a past that allows for the pos-
sibility of coexistence or to believe in a past that forever denies it. The well-
known Syrian intellectual, writer, and educator Butrus al-Bustani com-
posed a series of anonymous pamphlets which appeared in Beirut signed
by “one who loves the nation.” In these pamphlets, entitled Nafir Suriyya
(The Clarion of Syria), Bustani repeatedly stresses the need to come to
terms with the catastrophe of 1860, to punish perpetrators and thereby
bring a sense of closure and healing for the victims, but at the same time to
recognize the underlying causes for conflict and remedy them. He repeat-
edly calls for a secular education and civilization to confront the sectarian
legacy and memories of 1860. He makes the point that man is not sectar-
ian by nature or impulse but by education and socialization.86 In his mem-
oirs, Mikhayil Mishaqa is at pains to depict what pious Muslims did in Da-
mascus to protect and save Christians; he celebrates and reflects the
richness of a multicommunal society.87 For every Bustani and Mishaqa,
however, there are others who refuse or are unable to accept that there is
such a thing as a good Muslim or Druze or Christian. These are men and
women who “remember” (or are made to remember) the harrowing sto-
ries of their grandparents and great-grandparents draw little comfort in
their proximity to the “enemy” community. Precisely such anxieties and
memories, whose veracity is completely beside the point, thrive in a cul-
ture of sectarianism.
If the story of sectarianism has been told here with any depth, it has
been with the modest hope of showing that it is anything but a primordial
identity, that sectarianism has not somehow cheated the course of history.
A little more ambitiously, the point has been to illustrate how and why
sectarian identities were constructed and how they were understood at a
particular historical juncture. The goal has been to delve into this juncture
to illuminate the contradictions and layers of these identities. Without Eu-
ropean colonial imagination, missionary activity, and Eastern Question


[PDF page 183]
“A Very Old Thing” / 165
diplomacy, there never would have been sectarianism. Indeed, without Ot-
toman reform, there never would have been sectarianism. But, most im-
portant, without local participation, beliefs, hopes, desires, and fantasies of
the possible, there would never have been sectarianism. There has never
been a pure sectarianism, only narratives about its purity.
