[PDF page 184]
Epilogue
The first time as tragedy, the second time as farce.
Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
Sectarianism as an idea and as a practice belongs to the realm of the mod-
ern. If Ottoman modernization and European colonial influence set the
stage for the beginnings of what I have called the culture of sectarianism in
the nineteenth century, it was in the twentieth century, specifically with
the creation of nation-states, that the term sectarianism—ta’ifiyya—was
coined to suggest a state of being antithetical to modern national develop-
ment. It signified (and indeed only makes sense as) the opposite of a na-
tional mythology of coexistence—ta‘ayush—which could unite all citi-
zens regardless of their religious backgrounds.1 The result has been a
nationalist understanding of sectarianism— especially at an official
level—as an illegitimate and divisive force, more a deviancy than an au-
thentic expression of a specific historical experience. Sectarianism, more-
over, has been depicted as a monolithic force, unchanging in the face of his-
tory, while the nation-state has been viewed as the culmination of history.2
The truth of the matter, however, is quite the reverse: sectarianism was
produced. Therefore it can be changed. Nineteenth-century sectarianism
was a multilayered process that presaged the nationalist era. Sectarianism
was not the failure or corruption of nationalism or the nation-state in the
Third World; rather, if one were to look at it with hindsight, it was
Lebanese nationalism’s specific precursor, a formulation of new public po-
litical identities which eventually came to find their fullest expression, as
well as their deepest contradiction, in the Lebanese state—a republic born
through and renewed by latter-day Règlement Organiques known as the
National Pacts of 1943 and 1989.3
If nothing else, I have tried to suggest that sectarianism occurred not in
the distant past but in an era of the in-between, when old-regime society
had collapsed but an independent nationalist society had not yet formed—
166


[PDF page 185]
Epilogue / 167
a period of indigenous, European, and Ottoman interaction and collabora-
tion that spawned the contested culture of sectarianism. On the one hand,
it was a culture of the elites, who fought to keep their privileges intact and
to maintain a hierarchical social order; on the other hand, sectarianism also
reflected popular visions of the future, of liberation in a new landscape—
visions which pushed the ahali to violate social boundaries and to demand
rights that they thought were guaranteed to them by the Tanzimat. Yet
what has been deemed by historians to be the great success of a monolithic
sectarianism, the war of 1860, was in fact the great failure of a single sec-
tarian identity to impose itself in a world in transition.
explaining 1860
To a certain extent, nationalist concern with sectarianism as an allegedly
primordial religious identity that threatened (and still threatens) the na-
tion reflects its own nineteenth-century heritage. A colonial discourse of
progress and reform generated its atavistic antithesis, an immutable and
ahistorical religious fanaticism. Despite their many differences, contempo-
rary European writers wrote about sectarian violence with detachment,
quite literally gazing down at what they took to be a premodern spectacle,
just as Ottoman officials banished the events of 1860 to the realm of the ir-
rational. The creation of the Mutasarrifiyya was from the outset an impe-
rial process, decided first in Istanbul by the Sultan’s servants in conjunc-
tion with the European commissioners and then forced on the local elites
and the general population. This fait accompli renewed a pattern of mod-
ernized elitist sectarian politics within a single administrative framework.
Accompanying the imperial diplomacy and rival colonial interventions
that brought about the Mutasarrifiyya was a plethora of European ac-
counts explaining the nature of the violence. Jesuits, Protestants, French
officials, and British writers tried their hand at revealing the “truth” of
1860 from their allegedly detached and theoretically objective standpoints.
They lamented their own blindness at ignoring, while their rivals encour-
aged, the supposedly age-old religious passions of the mountaineers,
which had resulted (in their own eyes at least) in the inevitable calamity of
1860.4 With few exceptions, they wrote as if France and Britain had played
no part in the tumultuous history of the mid-nineteenth-century Levant.
They spoke as if the disastrous partition of Mount Lebanon had not been a
European diktat imposed by the combined wisdom of colonial powers, and
they assumed that the violence of 1860 belonged to a premodern world.
I will not dwell here on such accounts as Charles Churchill’s The Druzes


[PDF page 186]
168 / Epilogue
and the Maronites under the Turkish Rule and Baptistin Poujoulat’s La
Vérité sur la Syrie, both of which served as polemics against the so-called
barbaric Turkish rule. Beyond their invocation of native tribalism, these
European histories were written in a manner which effectively denied any
agency to the local actors. They believed in a grand Muslim plot, in which
Hurs¸id was a key figure. Ascribed with a mischievous, cunning, secretive,
and above all “rampant fanaticism” against Christendom and modernity,
Hurs¸id was blamed for setting Druze against Maronite. Churchill could
not hold back his anger at Europe for trusting the villainous “Turk.” He
wrote that far from being an accident, 1860 was the product of a “spirit of
calculating and deliberate malice and hatred, spreading its meshes through
a long series of years, to circumvent and then trample upon its unfortunate
victims.”5
Such European histories, which have been lauded by Arab newspapers
and consistently and (often) uncritically used as major sources by those
writing the history of the region, have been at the forefront of obfuscating
the complex realities of 1860.6 They have been singularly unhelpful in ex-
plaining sectarian identity as anything but an essential, unchanging, pre-
modern condition—the genuine sympathy and concern most of these
writers felt for the Christians of Mount Lebanon notwithstanding. Much
the same could be said about French descriptions that anticipated or justi-
fied the imposition of French mandatory rule in Lebanon following the
collapse of the Ottoman Empire. Jesuit authors such as Henri Lammens
wrote his La Syrie: Précis historique with an eye fixedly set on 1860 as the
great example of the backward-looking Ottoman Empire’s failure to realize
the difference between Christian Lebanon and its Muslim environment
and, of course, its failure to negotiate a transition to the modern world;
with another eye, however, Lammens determinedly looked forward to the
great task that lay before France to overcome this historical legacy with her
rational, Christian, and modern administration.7
Ottoman historians such as Cevdet Pasha—to say nothing of other
court chroniclers such as Lütfi Efendi and later republican historians such
as Res¸at Kaynar, M. Tayyib Gökbilgin, and A. Haluk Ülman—glossed over
the problematic nature of Ottoman rule in the periphery of the Empire.
Needless to say, Ottoman historians justified Fuad Pasha’s brutal restora-
tion of order in Syria. In fact, Ottoman and republican historians, with the
possible exception of Cevdet Pasha, exhibited an astounding ignorance of
the province (far more egregious than Churchill’s) and an unshakable be-
lief in the kadim ül-cereyan (long-running) religious hostility between
Druzes and Maronites. Like the Europeans, whom they always accused of


[PDF page 187]
Epilogue / 169
being behind the war of 1860, the Ottoman and Turkish historians perpet-
uated rather than contradicted colonial knowledge, albeit from an imperial
trajectory concerned with protecting and promoting the Ottoman state.8
In the Ottoman and Turkish historiography, the indigenous people were
reduced to instruments of someone else’s history, with no conscious aware-
ness of the stakes involved during the course of events. To these historians,
the struggle for modernity was a contest between the reforming Ottomans
on the one hand and intriguing Europeans and reactionary elements
within the Sublime State on the other. Mount Lebanon was merely a
venue for this struggle, and its inhabitants merely its pawns and victims.
wars with history
Despite the deluge of European accounts of the war of 1860 and the trickle
of Ottoman and later Turkish descriptions of the same event, local, Arabic-
speaking nineteenth-century chroniclers managed to present their own
understandings of the sectarian violence. The first and most striking dif-
ference between local narratives and those of the Europeans and Ottomans
is one of perspective: whereas the European and Ottoman observers com-
mented from the luxury of distance and from the vantage point of moderns
looking down with unconcealed horror at the savagery below, indigenous
writers were overwhelmed by the urgency of proximity. To them, the war
of 1860 was not simply a tribal problem that haunted the periphery of im-
perial or colonial concern, as it appeared to European and Ottoman offi-
cials, but rather a calamity that devastated local society, uprooted thou-
sands, and left a legacy of mutual acrimony and fear both within and,
especially, between communities. As was the case in the era before the age
of reform, the local chroniclers were drawn primarily from mostly Chris-
tian elite circles, but unlike their prereform counterparts they were con-
sumed by the need to provide some explanation for and a sense of closure
to the recent events.
To these authors, one form of history ended in 1860. The violence they
had witnessed had broken with the normal cycle and rhythm of local soci-
ety, for it was not that of elite feuds, which had been the staple of old-
regime chronicles. Instead it involved entire communities in which all
rules and customs were violated; social order as it had been known simply
dissolved into the fluidity and possibility of sectarian violence, the ulti-
mate goal of which, wrote one priest following the war’s end, “only [God]
knows.”9 The violence, in short, brought the local communities to the
brink of extermination both physically and metaphorically in an era of


[PDF page 188]
170 / Epilogue
massive transformation—an era in which European and Ottoman power
were more intrusive than ever before. The violence of 1860 was viewed as
a divinely sanctioned aberration of the normal.10
The first order of the day, therefore, was to reconstruct a sense of sta-
bility, to make the recent past make sense by drawing on one of the princi-
pal tenants of presectarian knowledge, namely the distance that separated
the juhhal from those who knew better, those who were in a position to
understand the consequences, and those who were empowered by tradition
to speak for society. Bishops and priests, educated men such as Mikhayil
Mishaqa, and notables such as Yusuf Karam interpreted the events of 1860
not as a social struggle but as a “plot” against Christians that fed on the ig-
norance of both Druze and Maronite ahali.11 Those who recorded the
“truth” of 1860 were surrounded by archives from the Kisrawan rebellion,
with letters signed and sealed by Tanyus Shahin infused with a language
of rights and equality. Yet all the elitist histories were recorded in the dis-
empowering, passive, and flowery language of plots, as if events were be-
yond the people’s control. These historians discerned a higher purpose that
no ordinary, ignorant person could possibly comprehend. If nothing else,
the existence of such indigenous literature, written before the develop-
ment of a formal nationalist discourse, brings into question the often sim-
plistic transitive relationship between colonialist and nationalist knowl-
edge.
Here then were manuscripts, books, and letters penned by the local
elites, which were produced alongside colonial discourse; in some cases, it
is true, they were inspired by colonialist knowledge. For example,
Churchill’s vivid descriptions of the massacres sometimes filtered back into
local accounts with suspicious similarity.12 On the whole, the local histo-
ries were an autonomous voice that persisted alongside colonial language
and did not simply replicate it.13
The first local narratives were produced immediately following 1860,
and they aimed to influence the decision-making process that led to the
creation of the Mutasarrifiyya. They attempted to exonerate a particular
community and to make sectarian claims on Europe as well as on the Ot-
toman Empire. Maronite bishops lost no time in putting forward their own
fantasy of possible development: that the Maronites alone be allowed to
govern Mount Lebanon since “history” proved that they had always been
the rulers and that only with them at the helm could Mount Lebanon (to
which Beirut, the Bekaa, Tripoli, Sayda, and Tyre would have to be added
to make it viable) prosper and be made more amenable to the cause of “civ-
ilization.”14 For their part, the Druze notables presented the British am-


[PDF page 189]
Epilogue / 171
bassador in Istanbul with a lengthy rebuttal to Christian claims that the
Druzes were the instigators of the conflict. “As it appeared, and is known
[throughout] all the land and filled all ears, . . . the Maronite Nation have
premeditated since 1840, about 20 years ago, the total extirpation of the
Druses from their Mountains.”15 Central to their contention were their re-
peated allegations about the existence of a Maronite “plot” to destroy
them. The Maronite bishops, in turn, proposed a similar story with the
roles reversed. In their version, it was the Druzes, indeed the Muslims
generally, who sought to destroy Christianity in the Levant. The Patriarch
was warned by his representative in Rome that the origins of events were
not to be found “in your neighbors but from those who are higher than
them.”16
Belief in conspiracy, no matter how understandable under the circum-
stances, lessened the need to face the contradictions that lay at the heart of
changing communal identities. Maronite and Druze notables could and did
(and still do) sling accusations at each other, but beneath those accusations
was (and remains) an acceptance of the other side’s claims to represent its
own ta’ifa. The need to present themselves as a coherent, unified, and or-
dered community that “traditionally” had and still deserved to rule Mount
Lebanon alone necessitated the existence of their rival sect as an ordered
and unified body whose mischievous, nay abominable, actions had invali-
dated their particular claims to rule Mount Lebanon.17 It is ironic indeed
that just as the people of Mount Lebanon were involved in the making of
their history, their historians were actively contributing to writing them
out of history.
After the catastrophe of 1860, local historians retreated to ponder the
meaning of the violence and to restore a vision of a unified community.
Their task was, in many ways, to go against the reality of the Mutasarri-
fiyya, which determinedly pretended that 1860 was a thing of the past, a
forgotten event, struck from official memory following Fuad Pasha’s mis-
sion.18 Yet in popular memory (which I have not touched on here) as well
as in the monasteries and in private family archives, a few manuscripts
survive to attest to the current of fear that persisted in Mount Lebanon.
The fact that the local authors broached the subject of 1860 was in itself a
subversive act because they threatened to evoke a history which was at
odds with an official memory that claimed to have uprooted all traces of the
events. Yet if these histories, which are today still scattered and frag-
mented, were to be placed side by side, they would narrate a simple story
of 1860 not as a fluid set of events in which the meaning of community was
contested at several levels but as a dramatic struggle— overseen, even in-


[PDF page 190]
172 / Epilogue
stigated, by unknown conspirators—between two communities for control
of Mount Lebanon.
Christian writers in particular were torn between the need to recount
and to remember the violence of the other sect, the need to maintain vigi-
lance against any future treachery, and the desire to get on with the busi-
ness of the day, administering Mount Lebanon on the basis of intercom-
munal cooperation under Ottoman auspices.19 Although accounts that
fueled the memories of intercommunal slaughter left little room for com-
promise, they framed the events within the context of divine wrath: a cat-
aclysm, a plot, but above all else an unusual event that implicitly suggested
that the usual history was that of intercommunal coexistence.20 In the ex-
isting literature, therefore, the Druzes were caught between their role as
compatriots of the Christians in Mount Lebanon and their recent history
as instruments of Christian agony. They were portrayed in two overlap-
ping, yet contradictory, manners—at once the perpetrators of a terrible
slaughter of Christians and the unsuspecting tools of the monstrous Turk-
ish plot of which they, too, were victims.
This contradiction is evident even in the most tendentious of manu-
scripts, such as Bishop Bustani’s recollections of 1860, which are preserved
today in Rome. In them, the Druzes were no longer willing instruments of
Turkish perfidy but rather unwitting accomplices. Bustani alleges that
Hurs¸id “seduced” the Druzes, that Kisrawan was a “trivial” matter that
was fanned into “sedition” by the enemies of the Christians while the
French consul stood aside. Yusuf Karam’s failure to aid the Christians—an
embarrassment that has not diminished Karam’s mythologized status as a
national hero of sorts—was put down to the combined pressure of the al-
legedly corrupt consul and the plotting Hurs¸id.21 In his own memoirs,
Karam recounts the same story of Turkish duplicity; he asserts that the
Druzes were led into civil strife.22 As if to confirm that 1860 was a tragedy
arising from a lack of foresight on the part of Mount Lebanon’s inhabitants,
the chronicler Iskandar Abkarius apocryphally relates how during one of
the battles between Druzes and Christians two men grappled and wrestled
on a beach just before dawn. In the heat of battle, they both fell into the
water and continued their struggle. A huge wave fell on them, and in the
ensuing confusion they were swept off to the deep, where they both
drowned. The moral of the story is not left to the reader’s imagination: in
the morning, their bodies were found on the beach, lifeless but still locked
in deadly embrace.23


[PDF page 191]
Epilogue / 173
the allegory of 1860
The meaning of the events of 1860 altered after the decolonization of the
Arab world, when nationalist discourse emerged as the dominant political
and cultural expression of the region. Nationalist historiography in all its
shades has inherited both the distant European and Ottoman perspectives
of sectarian violence and the immediacy and tragedy evident in local de-
scriptions. Determined to justify the existence of Lebanon as an independ-
ent state and with a vision of Lebanon “in” history, as the title of Philip
Hitti’s book put it, early nationalist scholars, like their peers in South Asia
and Africa, were unable to contemplate nationalism as anything but the
natural evolution of a people long under the domination of others. These
early scholars—from George Antonious to Philip Hitti to Asad Rustum to
Kamal Salibi— were convinced that modernity came only in the image of
a secular West, that 1860 was most clearly scripted as the dark point in the
nationalist narrative before an “Arab” or “Lebanese” awakening.24 Despite
the abundance of documentation available to them, few scholars compre-
hended the violence as anything more than a byproduct of elitist rivalries
in which, at set points, the dutiful ahali were marshaled in and out of the
nation’s history, maiming and plundering as they went.
I do not want to suggest that nationalist historians such as Hitti merely
replicated what came before them, because they did not. They exhibited a
fundamental belief in the naturalness of nationhood and in the inevitabil-
ity of the end of Ottoman rule. But when Lebanese and Arab nationalism
entered a period of sustained crisis in the 1970s, first with the failure to lib-
erate Palestine and then with the collapse of the Lebanese state, they and
their readers were suddenly left, in Albert Hourani’s words, with the feel-
ing “that something had been left out.”25 The outbreak of civil war in 1975
came as a rude shock given the optimism and confidence of the earlier na-
tionalist histories. Salibi, for example, undertook a revisionist history of
Lebanon by criticizing various nationalist and sectarian mythologies in his
A House of Many Mansions: The History of Lebanon Reconsidered, in
which he urged the Lebanese and Arabs to unthink many misconceptions
and to “start from a clean slate.”26 Adding to the disenchantment with na-
tionalist discourse, many authors watching the Lebanese predicament un-
fold singled out sectarianism and religious fanaticism as “premodern” ves-
tiges that have precluded the development of a modern, democratic, and
liberal state in the Middle East.27 Others, such as Georges Corm, however,
understood the civil war as the revenge of an Ottoman past and the conse-
quence of geopolitical rivalries over which the Lebanese people had no con-


[PDF page 192]
174 / Epilogue
trol.28 Perhaps most symptomatic of this reappraisal, which aims at draw-
ing a national lesson, is Leila Fawaz’s An Occasion for War, which con-
cludes with a comparison of the two civil wars. The recent Lebanese con-
flict also gave rise to a flood of partisan histories, to resurrected
“memories” of 1860 that warned of the allegedly treacherous nature of the
“Druze,” the “Maronite,” or the “Muslim.” And, in the aftermath of con-
flict, the Lebanese government has turned its back on the past, just as the
Ottomans did. Curiously, however, it has paradoxically abolished and
criminalized the memory of conflict, at once taking refuge in the myths of
historical tolerance and coexistence while signifying its own profound
skepticism of these myths.29
The story of 1860 should not be understood simply as a national allegory
but on its own terms and in its own nineteenth-century context. In the pre-
ceding pages, I have sought to explain a contemporary problem that can
neither be banished to some distant past nor be seen as a mere consequence
of colonialism, imperialism, or capitalism. Among the greatest red her-
rings of the history of the Middle East has been the characterization of sec-
tarianism as an obstacle to modernity and as a symptom of a so-called arc
of crisis. This interpretation has led to an increasingly frustrated path of
historical inquiry, with some scholars earnestly searching backward in
time for answers while the problem of sectarianism marches forward,
growing ever more entrenched and ever more complex. The beginning of
sectarianism did not imply a reversion. It marked a rupture, a birth of a
new culture that singled out religious affiliation as the defining public and
political characteristic of a modern subject and citizen. To overcome it, if it
is at all possible, requires yet another rupture, a break as radical for the
body politic as the advent of sectarianism was for the old regime. It re-
quires another vision of modernity.
Finally, by suggesting that the ethnic and religious conflicts in such ev-
idence today are not revivals of primordial passions, we will begin to ap-
preciate that the processes at work in nineteenth-century Mount Lebanon
are also at work in other modern societies, albeit in different forms and
with different discourses. Therefore, the question that I ask is not why the
Middle East has failed to modernize or secularize—which assumes that the
Western model of separation of church and state is the only path toward
modernity—but how religion became the site of a multifaceted colonial
encounter and why religious violence became a crucial component of na-
tional expression. What happened in Mount Lebanon could occur, and in
fact has occurred, elsewhere in the modern world.
