Title: Iran strikes back after Israel, US launch war, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-03-05
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kcz2Z09odKg
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: earliest post-March-2 context

You are watching and listening to the electronic atifada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day 881 of Israel's genocide in Gaza and day six of USIsraeli war on Iran. I am reporting
this on the afternoon of Thursday, March 5th. Things are moving quickly, so uh keep that in mind.
We'll um we're going to cover the first five days of this war. And let's start with the maps off the
top as we usually do. And uh this complements what Ally was talking about about the straight of
Hormuz. Um you got the choke point of uh global energy 20% coming out from Qatar and um 20% of the
oil uh natural gas from Qatar and 20% of the oil uh that the world uses comes through that straight.
Alli covered that uh really well. Just one thing that I'll add to that as a commander of the naval
force of the Islamic Revolutionary

Guard Corps said uh yesterday that the United States cannot escort ships out of the Straight of
Hormuz. Trump cannot send his fleet to extract those stuck in the Gulf or open the Straight of
Hormuz. Trump says, "We will escort the ships if necessary. Now is the time for necessity, Mr.
Trump, so come and escort your ships." Of course, that puts them uh well within range of short-range
ballistic missiles, anti-ship missiles. Um and so the Iranians are taunting the Americans to
actually escort those ships. That would be a massive undertaking for the Americans and they do not
have the warships in the area right now to do that. So it would involve another buildup. Um so for
now, I think the uh energy markets are going to spike for sure. And we look at the next one, we can
see these bases. These are are the main targets uh of this battle. Um each of these

countries uh moving from the shores of Iran out. Um the UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia,
Iraq, Jordan um and of course Israel uh are the main thrusts of it. The US has said that it has
dropped 2,000 bombs in the first 30 hours of this war. 1,000 um were in the first 13 hours of the
war. Um they've struck more than 2,000 targets. Um the Israeli Air Force said this morning that
they've dropped over 5,000 bombs in strikes. The Iranians say 500 ballistic missiles and more than
2,000 drones have been launched. Uh Hegathth the uh defense secretary uh outlined the mission. He
said the mission of Epic Fury is laser focused. Destroy Iranian offensive missiles. Destroy Iranian
missile production. destroy the navy and other security infrastructure. So, this is a regime change
operation. Um, and as Alli pointed out, Trump has 47 years of grievances uh against Iran uh that
they're using to justify

this uh uh regime change. If we look at the next map, you can see the bases uh that have been
targeted. Um, and these are the key bases uh in the UAE. Um the key bases there aloud in Kuwait is
the sententcom uh main air base and then beside it there in Bahrain is the fifth fleet which is the
naval command for um the entire region. Sentcom covers basically everything that you see in that map
and a little bit more um but you can see also targeting in Kuwait. There's a significant um force in
Kuwait. The numbers in between Kuwait, Bahrain, and Qatar are more than 40,000 American troops in
those bases. But the number of military bases and installations that have been targeted by the
Iranians are in the dozens. They've also hit diplomatic and strategic facilities like embassies, CIA
stations are all in those embassies. And the CIA um said this week that

they are um evacuating all of their CIA offices that are in um usually they're in the embassies um
particularly because the one in Riad Saudi Arabia was hit and Saudi Arabia also hosts that key air
base Prince Sultan air base um that you see down in the south there and in Jordan Muafa Galalti air
base that hosts the American Expeditionary Wing and we saw in my report last week about the buildup
that the US is concentrating their forces on that air base rather than having them all spread out.
So the uh air defense tactic is to concentrate their troops on uh a few of the bases and then use
the carriers that are out uh the carrier that is in the Mediterranean um and its guided missile
destroyers um as basically air defense for Israel. Um if we look at the next map again, you can see
the targets um all around. Those are both

sides targets as of yesterday. Um and you can see just how close those Gulf uh the Gulf states are
and the American bases are to Iran. And that is a huge advantage in weaponry. They do not need their
long range ballistic missiles. They can use shorter range um ballistic missiles. And that's the same
for traveling the straight of Hormuz. they can pull out um anti-ship ballistic and cruise missiles
to hit from close range. Those are devastating weapons at that range. And um the Americans don't
want any part of that. They haven't wanted that in the in the Yemen front as well. They keep their
carriers uh as far out of distance as they can. Um out of distance at least of the short range. Um
so they're off in the Arabian Sea there down in the bottom right of the map. And the um other
carrier, the USS Ford, is up uh off the coast

of uh Israel. It's out in the Mediterranean. It's not in Israel. There was a lot of misreporting
that it was coming into dock in Israel, but it is staying offshore. Again, Hezbollah has anti-hship
capabilities as well uh on the Lebanon coast that you can see there up in the upper left of that
map. Um so really is a regional war and these maps show that as clear as day. Um the next slide
here, we're going to start with um the school massacre because of course this is the way Israel uh
fights its wars and the Americans do too. Um the massacre at this school that was sort of captured I
think with this photo here that we're looking at a backpack with a child's blood on it. Um 168
school girls aged 7 to 12 were killed along with 15 of their teachers. There was two strikes on the
school in southeast Iran. uh in

the town of Minab. Uh six buildings including the school and the clinic were destroyed. Um we can
see on the next slide here um just the totality of this horror. Um these are the graves for the
children being dug. And as they always say in in Gaza, the smallest coffins are always the heaviest.
And you can see that um with those small um graves there that we're looking at a row row upon row of
graves to bury um more including the teachers more than 175 uh people and one more um like this will
show you the funeral on that day. And then the the funeral on that day despite Trump saying don't go
outside your house. It's scary. There's bombs falling. You don't want to be out there. there was a
massive funeral demonstration uh for these school girls um showing just um you know the kind of
resolve that I don't think the Americans

uh expected in this war um but the street scenes of those um funeral marches were incredible uh
under the scale of bombing that's happening um you know 7,000 bombs according to the US and Israelis
at minimum um and there was thousands tens of thousands of people out on the streets for those uh
mourning that funeral. Um we'll take a look at the next slide. Um because the war began with these
two strikes, the strike on the school and then the strike on the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Ham.
Um and he was killed uh at a meeting. So the key to the way the war started is it started on the
first day of the work week in Iran and it started at 9:30 in the morning. So when people were all
out in the streets and people were meeting in uh in their offices in the National Security Council
in Iran um and they uh

Americans and Israelis uh managed to kill in that assassination not just Ayatollah Ali Ham but also
the commander and chief of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards, the minister of defense, the head of
the military council, the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps aerospace force um as
well as the deputy the intelligence minister in that um again peridi by the uh Israelis because the
Iranians believed that they were still in negotiations after the last round of negotiations just
last week. Um negotiations were supposed to continue and they had plans to meet again. Um and so
again Iran trusting its enemy um to be honorable which we know from two and a half years of war with
Israel uh is not the case. This is a poster you're looking at here that was put out by the PFLP's
Abu Ali Mustapa brigades. Um that's uh that calls uh Ham a martyr on the road to alkuds and

Palestine and also the Kasam brigade spoke uh about um the martyed leader and this is what they
said. The martyed leader Ali Ham represented the primary supporter of the axis of resistance
Palestine and its fighters. Indeed, all the Islamic Republic has provided for decades in terms of
support and backing for our people and our resistance, at the heart of which are the Alcasam
brigades, was by his direct decision and under his full patronage. This great support and backing
for the path of resistance constituted an essential and important factor that contributed to the
development of the resistance and its tactics leading to the great creativity it displayed in al ax
flood and the legendary steadfastness for two full years in the face of the most powerful forces of
injustice in the region. So saluted by all of the Palestinian resistance factions. Of course, people
who've watched this show know that would be an obvious thing that

would happen from all of the factions from the leftists um all the way across the political spectrum
of uh of the resistance groups. Um we can see next here uh a promo that was put out by Kmeni uh
Ham's office of preservation and publication uh for the works of Ali Ham and they put out this uh
missile and drone launch that you can see and he says here we are not the initiators of war.
However, anyone who shows their greed and seeks to attack or cause harm will face a decisive blow
from the Iranian nation. And here we're seeing uh buried missile silos uh racks of shahid drones and
then attacks here uh on the uh various installations of the Americans in the region. I will go
through these operations one by one. Uh but we're seeing them now hits in Kuwait, Bahrain, uh Qatar,
Jordan, uh across the region. Um Ali Larjani, the secretary

of the Supreme National Security Council, the top security figure right now in Iran, said, "As in
the past 300 years, Iran did not start this war, and our braved armed forces are not engaged in any
attack except for defense. We will fiercely defend ourselves and our 6,000-year-old civilization,
regardless of the costs, and we will make the enemy regret their miscalculations." Iran unlike the
United States is prepared for a long war. Also just to note uh Ali Ham had a fatwa against nuclear
weapons for many many years decades even uh and him saying that was in the preamble preamble of the
JCPOA. So um again putting lie to the American propaganda um as always but we just uh cover it here.
Uh so we'll go to number 10 here. Um we'll show map of the missile range here. Um from their short
range uh missiles uh all the way to their more sophisticated high-end long range

uh solid fuel uh and advanced missiles down at the bottom which um according to the IRGC have not
been used yet. They um they said they have been saving them and using old stock. But you can see
with the concentric rings going out from 300 kilometers out to 2,000 km that they have missiles for
every purpose in this uh in this war for each distance for each um uh for each outcome. So a
significant missile force that has been built up um over more than a generation um and is being put
into use uh today. The next map is another one um showing their missiles again with a map that you
can see the distance all of it well within range um and they're also within range of drones which
they have been using significantly and we saw that in the previous three uh Iranian exchanges of
fire um true promise one 2 and three

and this is true promise 4 that we are in right now. If you look at the next slide, you can see some
uh launches from underground missile bases. And again, this is this the the key because the Israelis
and the Americans have been showing us lots of footage of uh launchers being knocked out um because
lots of them are truck launches and they're e they're easier to track once they have been launched.
Um but when you see these kind of underground facilities, these are very difficult for Israel to
get. They don't know where they are. Unlike um the nuclear facilities where they knew where they
were um and had previous interactions with the United Nations inspectors and whatnot, these missile
bases are um are not known to the Israelis. There's the Shahed drones. Um there's their longer range
uh fuel uh liquid fuel missiles. Um and you saw a bunch of launches of solid fuel

missiles as well. Solid fuel missiles are uh a lot better because you don't have to load them. You
don't have to load the fuel. You don't have to have workers out there uh exposed while you're
loading. Um and so the solid fuel advanced missiles, which is what we will be seeing in the coming
days um and weeks are um a preferable on the battle space. And these are all being uh you know these
are missiles that cost maybe you know high hundreds of thousands early millions um early 1 millions
uh to co to to make and the uh interceptors that are knocking them down um that are not uh built as
fast uh are in the 3 million to 27 million range. Um, so there is a a massive discrepancy in the
outlay of costs in this war, which will also over time uh be a damning factor for um for the US and
its

stocks. We won't get into too much of that on this show right now because the first week of the war,
we don't need to worry too much about missile stockpiles and interceptor stockpiles, but I've talked
about it on this show a number of times when we were covering Yemen. Um that the uh the missile math
is not um uh it's very finite. Uh the uh interceptors are expensive. Um the military um buildup for
this war was very fast. It wasn't planned. Um so they didn't have chance to um you know increase
domestic production which is something that almost can't really happen in the US the way the economy
um is shaped and this particularly the military-industrial complex is shaped. So these things will
all be significant as the days go on. Iranians, 500 ballistic missiles, 2,000 drones, and IRGC said
40% have been aimed at Israel and 60% at US bases and consulates throughout the

region. Um, we will go to 13 now, I think. Yes. Yes. Okay. So, here's some strikes on Israel. Again,
there's massive censorship in Israel. We're watching um this is a news broadcaster that we've seen
footage come from before. Obviously, one of the producers is sneaking this footage out. Um but we
have seen off this um uh off this balcony a number of shots and uh for people uh listening um we're
watching the streaks in the sky and the massive blast hitting Tel Aviv. And of course they tell you
in Tel Aviv that these uh aren't landing and that they have 100% interception rates. In fact, the
next video that is uh going to come in this series. Yeah. This one here from NBC. They're on the air
talking about how uh the Iron Dome gets all the rockets and gets all the missiles. Um and then this
one comes right in right while they're talking.

I cut their talking out for the same reason Alli cut uh Netanyahu because you don't need to hear it.
But uh they don't know what they're talking about. They're talking about the wrong um uh air defense
systems. But as they were bragging about how good they were, a missile came right down uh and
smacked and then they had to talk about that missile and try and figure out what what was going on.
Um and you can see the uh on the ground the censorship in Israel has been remarkable. Um the threat
of jail time will do it I guess for people. Also, there's a nationalistic element in it that they
don't want to be I I I assume that there's a nationalistic element of not wanting to be um shown to
be humiliated uh in front of the world. But for whatever it is, the number of videos coming out from
Israel compared to the

12-day war um which itself was uh covered in shrouded in censorship um is even less this time
around. This next slide is going to have audio in it. Oh yeah, >> [snorts] >> So that's from uh on
the ground in Israel. These are all targeting of Israel at the beginning. What you heard was
cheering from children in Gaza. Uh and you can note that throughout uh this report that each of the
countries um have the missiles falling on them ostensibly are cheering those missiles. We'll see
that again when we cut to Bahrain. Um I think we have uh audio in the next slide as well. We also
have a siren. So um be aware that there's going to be a siren. that this is the sound of what uh the
war sounds like in Beersa in southern Israel. Yo yo What? So this was from Monday. Um it was the
11th wave of Operation True

Promise. The IRGC is releasing um their field reports in waves um that they talk about and this wave
uh included Beer Shva where there's an IDF industrial communications complex in the city and that
barrage wave 11 targeted 20 sites across Israel. So spreading out um spreading out the attacks
keeping the entire country moving to shelters. Um these are strategies rather than using advanced
missiles. um they're using they've been saying they're using their old stock up and um keeping
people on the run throughout Israel from the north to the south and that is uh clearly part of the
strategy of this. We have again audio in this next slide but we are going to now go to Bahrain. Um
so this is the targeting of the fifth fleet the US naval command uh in Manama Bahrain number 16. Oh
my god. Oh my god. Oh my god. Oh my god. >> Okay. So, as you can

see, the Bahrainis don't seem to have much problem with uh the US bases being targeted. Of course,
in each of these countries, there's movements to get rid of these bases um that are stamped out by
um by the uh royal families that uh run these countries as their own personal thiefs. Um so that is
Bahrain, fifth fleet. This is a critical uh critical site for the Americans. Overseeing the entire
region between the fifth fleet and Aluduade air base in Qatar uh forms the real uh the real core of
the US presence in the region. We got audio in the next one. Again this is again the fifth fleet. So
the same things you hear uh in Gaza in Bahrain as well. Um and this next one also has audio in. This
is the targeting of hotels. And let me just say before we show this um that this is the targeting of
hotels of US

troops. The IRGC said the flight of cowardly US soldiers from regional bases, they're taking refuge
in hotels in host countries and their criminal army's use of civilian facilities in the Persian Gulf
countries as cover do not escape the intelligence monitoring of the IRGC. So, we'll take a look at
18. And you can actually hear that on the first one I showed you three back when the when they were
in the car. That's American soldiers in the car. Uh in many cases, these videos are coming from
American soldiers while they're in their hotels. And that's why you're hearing people speaking
English like that. uh and in that car while they were being shocked. Um so that was 18. We have a
lot of media today. So thanks tomorrow for working through this all with me. So this is the burning
of those facilities after. Again, they've been targeted numerous times. Um but this is what you

see when you drive by on the highway of the uh fifth fleet. And there's times where um people
wouldn't have thought this was possible to see this. Um these bases have been built particularly
they were built for um they started in uh in the Gulf War in the first Gulf War in the 1990s but of
course the post 911 war on terror expanded these bases considerably um and they were not popular
locally. Um so that's 19. And just to give you a sense of how the IRGC writes up their um uh field
reports like we we we've described the Cassam Brigades doing. So this is how the IRGC does it. They
say the 18th wave of Operation True Promise 4 has begun. We remind the arrogant enemy the movements
of American soldiers in Qatar and Bahrain and their use of non-military facilities in Persian Gulf
countries are not hidden from us. No amount of air

defense systems will help you. Um, so that's how that was announced before those drones were
launched. So it's almost like an early warning. Um, but effectively telling exactly what is being
hit. And I think we'll see that in these next few uh is this 20? Okay, this is the continued
burning. So th those two uh 19 and 20 go together with these burnings of these facilities that we're
seeing um that the uh that the US is saying they're intercepting or Bahrain is saying they're
intercepting all of these and they're just clearly not um we will see with the next slide um
satellite imagery. Um you can see the base. We're seeing the base there and then before and after of
the base clearly showing um a headquarters that was hit in this base. Two satellite communications
terminals were destroyed. Several large buildings at the base were also destroyed and extensively
damaged. The New York Times

said this is New York Times satellite analysis. Um and you can clearly see the damage. So these are
pinpoint strikes and that's the thing is about the drones. They um you can you could make them
pinpoint. That's that's what they do. they hit uh right where they're supposed to go. Um GPS tracked
or uh to get them exactly on their topic or Russian in in a lot of cases Russian GPS is being used.
Um so you can see the destruction there. Um and the next one you can see um aloud air base again
satellite communications. These are the two key bases to repeat. And so when you're knocking out the
satellite communications at these bases, you're knocking down the capacity for the network
connectivity that the entire American um missile defense program and defense in general runs on. So
clearly the first targets of this war were those uh satellite and terminal um and satellite

terminals and communication terminals. Um again we saw that with the early days of the Hezbollah um
joining the war after October 7th knocking out Israel's network connectivity. Um these are very
standard and important first day of war um attacks. And just to give you a sense the UAE says that
they have endured more than 800 drones and 186 uh ballistic missiles. So with more than a thousand
targeting just the UAE um itself and it has a major US air base uh there too. Although air base um
in Qatar they say uh 100 ballistic missiles, three cruise missiles, 24 drones. Um Kuwait was 180
ballistic missiles, four 400 drones. uh 100 uh missiles in Bahrain and 76 drones and dozens in Saudi
Arabia which we will see in these next two slides. This is the Prince Sultan Saudi air base. Uh oh,
that's another Al- Udade. And yeah, here's the um the Prince uh Sultan. So,

this is Aludade. We'll go to the next one. Um that shows more destruction uh of those satellite um
terminals. This is the Prince Sultan base that you can see again structural damage. Um large plumes
of smoke coming up from them. So direct hits on these bases. Um 26. We're going to take a look at
Jordan. Now this is the key um US expeditionary base. Um Mafak Alsalti. And you can see there
clearly a direct ballistic missile hit uh in on that air base. Uh, and again, people uh, watching
that closely. The next one shows you um, a problem that we've seen a number of times, but you can
see over to the right there, that's a misfiring interceptor that's just being fired into the
Jordanian community uh, along with the shrapnel that uh, from the because the drones are mostly shot
out of the sky using fighter jets and helicopters. So, they blast them out

of the sky and the pieces fall all over Jordan. Um, and that's part of the deal, I guess, with the
king. Um, and again, at this air base, it's key because this is a concentration of US forces on top
of the expeditionary airwing that's already based at that base in Jordan. Um, I showed you the map
um the the satellite imagery of uh that base um in Jordan in last week's show and there wasn't
enough room for any more airplanes. It was all uh bristling with fighter jets. So when these get
it's it's one thing to concentrate your defenses uh but when your defenses are concentrated and
something gets through um it's going to be a a big mess. So um they are expending extraordinary
amounts of interceptors to try to prevent that from happening. This next one uh 28 this is going to
have audio in as well. Um, this is a strike on

a US base in Kuwait. And you can hear the US soldiers commenting uh on the strike here in this one.
>> That's my [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] truck. >> So, I think it's a joke cuz he's looking at a bunch of M
wraps there, but the the soldier says that's my truck. Um [snorts] and these uh there has been six
US soldiers killed on these bases in these attacks. These are the only um casualties that the
Americans have admitted to. Drop site has done some reporting that um that they believe the number
is um being suppressed significantly. Um but we will have to see in the coming days um when the
honesty of casualties comes out because we're particularly not hearing about wounded soldiers. Um
and also just to to say those drone strikes that were hitting um the uh the city the um that were
hitting those hotels um those are not killing um locals. The number

of locals killed um in each of these countries is in the single digits um throughout this war. And
we're not clear who they are. Um if they're on the base, if they're base workers, all of that stuff
is still all fuzzy at this point. Um but we will keep track of that of course. And the next uh slide
you could see the significant damage at uh the Ali al-Salm um base in Kuwait. You can see again
satellite dishes, radar domes, um all the specific targets um of those. So they're taking drones um
precision drones that are about uh I mean they're basically the the the price of your car. They go
the speed of your car. They're roughly the size of your car. That's a good way to understand them.
Um, but they're very accurate with their with their strikes. And so they're using the drones to
flood the air defenses, uh, waste air defenses,

but also to get in and knock out these cris uh these critical nodes of the air defense system. Um,
and then 30, I think we can see uh the embassy here in Kuwait uh on fire. The embassies have all
been evacuated. Um, but also the CIA bases attached to the embassies have also been evacuated
because they were hit in Riad the other day and the CIA announced that everybody uh was to evacuate.
Now, for this next one, we're going to have audio in here because we're this is the um the shooting
down of three uh US F-15s that were downed by um apparently Kuwaiti friendly fire. um all three of
them right in a row here. Um and we're going to watch each one of them. These are F um F-15 E strike
eagles falling from the sky. You could see the ejection of the pilots there. According to Sencom,
all six pilots survived. Um

when they reached the ground, they were treated um all were treated well by uh the population when
they landed. You can see the ejection from that one as well. So, three uh three more lost fighter
jets. We know they lost three during the Yemen um uh battles as well. And the key to this is not
just that it's an accident that happens. The key is that it's during active combat. It's when
missile drone uh combo attacks are happening, layered attacks are happening incoming um that creates
the confusion um that creates the friendly fire or in the case of Yemen where the um aircraft
carrier had to do a sharp turn and therefore lost the plane overboard. But that's not just happening
in a vacuum. It's happening in the moment of a complex strike that's happening directly on these
forces. So, um, they are friendly fire, but they're, uh, very much, um, a forced error, if

we can use a tennis term there. Um, [snorts] so there was also reporting today. I won't get into
that, but there may have been a fourth uh, fighter jet, American fighter jet shot down uh, in Iran.
There's early reporting about that. Um, we'll have to wait to confirm all of that. And all of this
stuff takes a lot to confirm because as I'm sure people watching know there has been a lot of
misinformation, disinformation, um purposeful uh misguidance of what's going on uh as part of the
propaganda campaign uh happening here. Let's take a look at Dubai now. Um 32. Um this is IRGC. I
think we have audio in this one as well for 32. So that was the US embassulate in Dub uh in Dubai. I
believe that it was a consulate um not an embassy but an emptied one. Um and again Alli talked about
these countries as brands. um these kind

of attacks uh definitely take the shine off of that. Um you'll see one more angle of it here coming
up. Right now we're watching uh street level view of uh panicked people and there's the burning uh
consulate shown from people driving down the highway. Um and then the next slide you can see that
the um the uh Ministry of Defense of the UAE has been putting these out. They say they have detected
186 ballistic missiles launched towards them. They say they have intercepted 172 of them. Not sure
how um not sure how good these stats are, but they're putting them out. And it's interesting for at
least what they are seeing coming at them. You're talking about eight cruise missiles and uh Shahed
drones fired at them. So more than a thousand uh projectiles fired at the UAE alone. um in this
case. So significant focus on the UAE uh as well. Um now let's

take a look at some of the drones. Um the uh the drones uh the IRGC aerospace force has downed a
number of drones. I attempted to do a count of them because to see if we could match them up. Um but
we have footage like this footage clearly here of an Israeli Hermes 900. There's an Elbit drone. One
less Elbit drone. Here comes another uh Elbit drone blasted out of the sky. And then there's a third
one here that's an Israel Aerospace Industries Haron drone that you can tell um the difference
between them because of the um the back wing that you'll see. Um so these are being knocked out of
the sky every day in Iran. We see footage of them on the ground. We've seen some of this footage
from the missile cam. That's what you're seeing here. These look a lot like uh the weapon that was
used in Yemen. Uh it's

not totally clear, but um it seems to be the same the 358 that the Amenes were using to um to down a
couple of dozen uh MQ9 Reapers. So far, these are all uh Israeli drones that we've seen drop. Um
although the Iraqi resistance uh reported that they got a um an MQ9 Reaper. If they did, I'm sure we
will be seeing that um in due time. Um the Iranians and number 35 has two two more drones coming out
of the sky. Um you can see them dropping here again. It's a Hermes uh falling out of the sky and
then there's going to be a number another one on the ground. And we've seen at least we've seen more
than a dozen for sure separate uh drops. The Iranians uh the Iranian army is also doing air defense.
They do an integrated air defense with the IRGC. Um and they put their number of drones

downed um in the many dozens um something like 30 through these days. Um but difficult to verify
because we don't have footage of all of them. Um the Ansar Allah movement always gave us footage uh
to match uh their uh their claims. So we uh we'll see we'll see if this uh reporting uh crystallizes
more in the coming weeks. But you can see it that drop down again over a city um in um southern
Iran. And then there's this is the the Hermes 900. This appears to have been taken down by
electronic warfare because it is perfectly more or less perfectly intact. Um and the uh IRGC said
that um that it was under the control of the fighters of the aerospace force of the IRGC. And there
you can see um its bomb load um out uh loaded out hadn't used them yet uh on this particular drone,
but uh definitely not seeing this

on news that I'm watching. So, um, I thought I'd bring you this, uh, angle as I always do. Um, and
then this, this was an interesting story cuz the US has actually cloned the Shahed drone and have
their own and they announced number 36 here. They announced their own um, the launch historic first.
They they said this was uh, um, this was on day two that they uh, it says we're looking at a Sentcom
uh, tweet press release. It says, "Sencom's task force Scorpion strike for the first time in history
is using one-way attack drones in combat during Operation Epic Fury. These lowcost drones modeled
after Iran's Shahed drones are now delivering Americanmade retribution." So again, uh blustery
American uh military uh announcements followed by Let's take a look at the next clip. Uh it only
took uh some few hours before the Iraqis were picking apart uh one of these Lucas drones, lowcost um

drones that look exactly like the Iranian drones and are run on Starlink. You can see the Starlink
um satellite dangling off there. So that that was less than 24 hours turnaround from them boasting
about retribution to uh Iraqis in the desert laughing and and having fun with the drone trying to
decide what to do if it can fit in their pickup truck or not. Um sort of like the footage we used to
see in Yemen when the drones would down. So that's a remarkable little turnaround there for uh their
copycat drones. And now Hezbollah joined the war. I think Hezbollah joined the war this week, but
the war was going to join Hezbollah. So, I think that they got out in front of it. Um, there hasn't
been a ceasefire. The ceasefire has been in many ways more fraudulent in Lebanon than it is in Gaza
even, which is hard to say because it's been

brutal in Gaza. Um, but in Lebanon, the number of violations is in the tens of thousands. And the
number of Hezbollah commanders, operatives, soldiers killed is more than 500. There's daily strikes.
Um, and this war was not going to let uh Israel was not going to let Isra was not going to let
Hezbollah be on the sidelines of this war. So, Hezbollah joined the war um two days ago and
immediately we get clips like this. number 38. We see a mark of a tank there in the distance. And
again, this is in um this is at the top of the Galilee panhandle. Um and that's a Cornet anti-tank
guided missile that's going to be launched and a direct hit you're going to see as it spools its way
on target. Um this is a remarkable shot, multiple kilometer shot. Um I didn't do the calculation
myself but um I saw a calculation from a source

that said that this was 5 kilometers um which would make sense and again this is an area that
Hezbollah is not supposed to be let alone their uh clearly that they the first shot was clearly by
their anti-tank marksmen because that is a long-distance shot and it hit perfectly. The Israelis
have rec uh said that there has been uh several injuries inside tanks that have been hit by um anti-
tank guided missiles. So Hezbollah is back 36 operations in the first two days and they're on their
way to that total again today. Um and of course the um the Islamic res Hezbollah said in this um on
this post uh of this video they said that um of the field report they said the Islamic resistance is
committed to defending its land and people especially as the Israeli enemy crosses boundaries within
its crime with its crimes. It is its response targeted military sites unlike the

enemy which targets civilians. So Hezbollah is saying we target military sites. Um and they have
rocket um and drone attacks um on you on Israeli bases all across um the the front line which now
includes Syria because the Israelis are occupying Syria now as well. So they were targeted there by
Hezbollah as well. And number 39 we're going to see the Iraqi resistance has been uh this is an
underground missile base. You can see Nasraa Kasamsulammani. Um you can see their missiles and in
their underground um in their underground bunkers as well. And the Iraqi resistance joined
immediately. They didn't need uh any prompting. They joined the war in the first minutes of the war
and began uh hammering the American air base at Airbil in northern Iraq. Um as well as the uh uh the
two other American air bases also. So that's the air bill um airport that you're seeing air base
that

you're seeing in flames there from the Iraqi resistance. And just one more number 40 um of of all of
this after all of this the US sent out this notice this week. Um this is from the state department
that says security updates for Americans in the Middle East. Depart now via commercial means due to
serious safety risks. and it lists the countries Bahrain, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Israel, the West Bank,
Gaza, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.
So, essentially the Americans saying, uh, we're too busy, uh, protecting Israel right now to, uh,
worry about our, um, our people in the region. we didn't uh we we sprung the war on them so fast
that they didn't have reasonable chance to get their families out of the region and they they say to
them depart now uh and you're on your own although I did hear yesterday on the news

that instead of um just hanging up on people calling the embassies that there's now a recorded
message so um just real kind of a last thing to just say that um the the focus is never seems to for
the America Firsters on the Americans. Um, that was all a big fraud. So, this has been the
resistance report for day six of the war in Iran.
