Title: Iran inflicts costly blows to US, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-04-09
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w42XSiXMCEE
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: earlier context

So you are watching and listening to the electronic inifada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day 916 of Israel's genocide in Gaza. Day 41 of the USIsraeli war against Iran and day 38
of Hezbollah's battle versus the Israeli military in South Lebanon uh against Israeli annexation.
Let's take a look at the first map here. We're going to show the Persian Gulf cuz obviously um from
the one end up at the top, this was significant portion of the past week was dedicated to uh
understanding the mountains uh up in the north uh west there uh corner there of Iran after the
shootown of an American pilot. And then on the right hand side of the screen, you're seeing the
straight of Hormuz. We already saw this morning um that uh the IRGC has given maps out to the
sailors um showing where the route that they must go um over that closest

island that you see on the far right uh just off the tip of the largest island. You can see the
space in between those two islands on the far right at the top. Um that is where the so-called uh
Tyrron toll booth is working. uh ships are going through there. Started a little bit I believe, but
um a lot of reports saying that the numbers are a lot higher than we're seeing right now. Um and
Iran sent out a message um the IRGC Navy sent out a message yesterday saying that uh vessels had to
communicate with them in order to cross the straight. But the general wartime uh situation in the
strait has a possibility of changing if this ceasefire holds um in which case the toll booth can be
used um presumably by uh all states because if there's not an aggression on Iran or Lebanon
hopefully on Gaza um that that ships will

be able to pass. And we heard um I don't know how much it's worth talking about Trump, but we we we
heard him saying that he might get in on the on the toll booth. So he he's all over the map. Um so
it's difficult to uh predict from them. But in in in the from the Iranian point of view, they stated
the statement that we have heard on this program many times from the resistance in Gaza and we'll
hear it again later on in the show from Abu Abda. Um but they said that you cannot take through
negotiations what you failed to take through war. So these negotiations are not going to be
something where Iran gives up its main uh points of b of uh its main points in order to just have a
ceasefire. That does not uh seem to be in any of Iran's communications. They started their message
about the

10-point plan by uh obviously talking about a deep distrust of the people that they're negotiating
with considering the assassinations um the perfidious assassinations that uh uh preceded
negotiations in the past two times in the past um and three if you want to include Gaza. Um so that
is significant. CNN reported that there's 426 tankers in the straight and 53 LNG liquid national
natural gas uh tankers in the straight that are going to be moving. Um we can take that look at the
next slide for that. Um and you can see the way that the flow through um through the straight of
Hormuz is very tall is very small because it's a shallow waterway. It's a rocky shallow waterway.
Um, so vessels have to pass through a smaller channel than the one that it looks like uh on this
map. There's some talk that um the Hormuz toll booth uh would generate $64 billion in revenue

for the Iranians. It would restore Iranian currency because they're taking payment in Iranian
currency um as well. um and that they will assert sovereignty over the strait uh henceforth. Um we
take a look at the next map or or let's take a look at the first air defense operations because
obviously this week was defined by Iranian air defense operations. Uh surfaceto-air ambushes. This
is the downing of an MQ9 Reaper drone that we're seeing on camera here. On the next one, number
four, we can see um a miss. So, this is part of the breaking down these videos is it it the
implication of this video was that this has been a fighter jet that's been hit, but you can see that
it's not the case. Those are um uh evasive maneuvers that it's performing right now and you can see
it dumping flares um in order to throw off the heat seeker of the missile.

So, that's what we're watching and you can see the Iranians are trying to get lock on it. There goes
the flares. Um, and you can see that these videos are published and a lot of people interpret
interpret these as hits. Um, but we got to break down these videos for what we see. But the point of
this video is that they've been all over uh the air defense integrated air defense of the Iranians
has been all over American and Israeli planes. The Israelis admit it um that the surfacetoair
missile ambushes are um effective, very effective. The Israelis said they wanted to learn from that,
that there was a lot to learn from that. Um, and the US has been mostly telling lies, and we'll get
uh into that uh shortly. Um, let's go to the next one because this is what we saw um on Friday. Uh a
a an F-15 uh Strike Eagle that

was uh shot down. We can see the parts of it there, the tail fin. Um, it's a strike eagle from the
494th Fighter Squadron, which is part of the 48th Fighter Wing Unit based out of uh, RAF Lanen Heath
in the UK. Um, the next slide will show you more pictures that we saw on the ground. Um, the
Americans were silent on this. In fact, the White House, um, the Pentagon and Sentcom were silent on
this. the um the sententcom statement uh was one of their fact check statements um where they they
claim that something that was claimed happened didn't happen often it did happen and in this case
through the entire weekend of this uh plane being shot down um which was major news obviously in the
United States um they still had up the tweet saying that it was false um so lies um um and and
really essential omissions um have been

uh the defining moment since the F15 was shot down. Um the US said it was a shoulder fired well
Trump said it was a shoulder fired uh lucky shot u but it was not and this is relevant shortly in
trying to explain the particular locations of the pilot and the weapons officer and the plane
itself. Um they would later say that the F-15 was between 30,000 and 50,000 ft. Um which is far too
high for the 10,000 ft ceiling of effective ceiling for most uh manportable air defense systems.
Iran said that they were hit with a new advanced air defense system. But the altitude of the F-15 uh
when it was hit is what explains the difference between the distance between the pilot um who we
have we have no information on the pilot. The pilot was first. The Americans say he was rescued um
in a daylight operation seven hours after he went down.

We have lots of witness footage from on the ground showing the search, but nothing that shows um the
Americans touching down, but they said that they had him and that the search was now uh for the
weapons uh service officer. He is in the back part of the plane. And if we look at this next slide,
um you can see the ejection and how the the way that the ejection works after the pilots have been
hit. Um they pop the canopy off, they catapult at 20 G's. They're literally rocket boosted out of
their seats. Those arrows don't uh really do justice. If you watch the videos of uh ejections, it's
like a rocket launch. It's a rocket assisted uh launch out of the chair um at uh about 400 mph. Um
and so depending on the height of the plane and how it was damaged, the plane sailed on for um 7 to
10 minutes.

The pilot was ejected at a different spot at a different fraction of a second as the plane is still
traveling at 400 mph. And that explains why one pilot was apparently on one side of the um uh Zagros
Mountains and the uh weapons officer was on the other side. Um if we take a look at this next uh
slide, you could see where the crash site occurred um and where the wreckage of the uh American
planes uh that were blown up during the uh said rescue operation. And you'll see uh in this next map
uh the reason why uh there was some speculation that this was um a raid on the Isvahan nuclear
facility based on the um distance from uh Isvahan. Um so that shows you the Persian Gulf. We're
looking at the Persian Gulf and up on the north uh western tip uh of the Persian Gulf is where um
the pilot was

said to go down. But again, the pilot was we only know about the pilot being rescued based on
Americans statements. We never saw planes touch down uh for that part of the um from for to get the
pilots back to rescue the pilots. Um and we can look at the next map uh as well. Um, okay. This is
this is the planes that were shot down during So, the first uh rescue attempt was in the day. It was
in the daylight. Um, and the US lost um uh an A10 Growler that we're looking at here. Um, the uh the
Warthog, as it's known, it is a uh close air support uh plane. It was shot down and its pilot um
apparently bailed out in Kuwait. The plane crash landed in Kuwait during the attempt to um to to
rescue the first pilot. Um we can go to the next one now and see um this

is the profile of the helicopters that were shot down. These are two um combat search and rescue
versions of Blackhawk helicopters. Two of these were shot down during that first day in the
daylight. Um so the Americans lost a significant um we can add it to the tally of significant costly
losses uh to the Americans. Again, really sketchy reporting on this. Um we know they were shot down
by Iranian ground fire. Um but again, no reports on the the state of the fourman crew. um two of
them, so eight crew members that apparently got shot out of the sky and we haven't heard uh anything
about their conditions or whether they were injured. Um these two planes are um search and rescue
versions of Blackhawk helicopters um and they're part of the would be part of the rescue uh package.
And the next one we see is the um HC130J. And these are similar to

the um these are similar to the C130s except these are for uh austere runways to land um in areas to
insert special forces. And we saw these planes be used in Afghanistan to insert special forces for
raids, which is also part of the reason that um there's some discussion about whether this was
actually um a fake out and a raid on the nuclear uh to try to the Iranians are calling it the
uranium heist. Um but the evidence that we have so far um isn't enough to take us down that road.
Um, we still have a lot to learn about this, but two of these planes that are very uh specific and
there are not many of them in the US um arsenal were uh shot down or were blown up on the runway um
in the capture in the um rescue of the pilots. Um so these two uh hundred million plus dollar planes

um were lost as well. And we can look at the next slides. Inside these planes are these um these MH6
um MH6 or AH6 if it has um uh offensive capabilities on these helicopters. But these are special
forces helicopters um that are used to carry in this case it was SEAL team six that was doing this
operation along with the um the par rescuers. Um, and so again, this looks like a special forces
mission. Um, if you don't have the pilot involved, um, a special forces mission may look like, um,
the insertion that we saw. Um, I'm still skeptical of that. I don't think the US had any intention
of going on land in Iran. And I think that the amount of things that went wrong in this um um
purported rescue operation um show the signs of how difficult um the any kind of an operation um
that would have to traverse over a

second mountain to reach ifahan. um and then gather the materials which are unknown uh in an unknown
location and take those back. Um and in terms of setting up a forward base, it wouldn't be where you
would set up a forward base. It was just um uh apparently a crop duster runway essentially. Um but
the C130s um the HC130 can land in that short space. So in that moment of time um when they were
trying to leave the site that they had landed as the sun was coming up the first day operations was
daylight they got lit up they lost all their planes um so they did it the next day the second day
they did it overnight and as sun as the sun was coming up on the third day um their plane they
realized that their plane was stuck the C1 HC130s were stuck um and they were forced to destroy them
uh

with air strikes and to um uh then a Delta Force unit came in and extracted um the crews that were
on those um vehicles and removed them out. So to add uh so we lo So they lost two um HC130s, they
lost four little birds, the MH6s or AH6s, they lost an A10 Thunderbolt. Um they lost a number of MQ9
Reaper drones, at least two on the first day and one on the second day. Um that were shot down by
Iran. Um and they also shot down the two uh Blackhawk uh rescue versions of the Blackhawk
helicopters. You can add that to the 10 KC135s that had been lost. uh two in a in a um aerial
accident where six of the pilot of the crew were killed and then the others on the runways at the
air bases in uh Saudi and in Jordan. They've lost dozens of Reaper drones. Um the Israelis have

lost dozens of drones as well, several dozen. Um we know about the F-15s that were shot down in
Kuwait by friendly fire. They lost two um Awax um the E3 centuries, the battlefield um uh radar
essentially over the battlefield, which is a significant loss. We reported on the show last week. Um
we watched F-35s get clipped. We watched an F-18 get clipped. We watched an F-15 get clipped. So all
of these uh assets um are clearly showing that Iran has air defense systems and um the shot the
shootown of the F-15 um on Friday was right after Trump said that they had that the Iranians had
zero air defenses and then they come up with enough air defenses to um to effectively down the full
set of uh of um combat search and rescue aircraft in this uh situation. So, um let's take a look at
what they look like on the ground. Now, number

10 here. Um you can see this video from uh on the ground. You can see the destruction there. You see
the little birds. Um the C130s are completely destroyed. According to American media reports, 40
bombs were dropped from B1 bombers on this site alone and another 100 bombs were dropped in the area
around it to cut off the roads around this area to not allow anyone in. Um, and that uh Reaper
drones were patrolling the area, firing on anybody that came close. So, you could see complete
destruction um of these uh pretty significant jets. And if we look at 11, you can see the little
birds in particular there on the right, uh, destroyed. The little birds, they come out of the back
of the C130s. Um, there you can see a better shot of it. They come out the back of the they're
loaded onto the C130s in their underbay. They drop the underbay

and they bring out the little birds and they literally put the propellers onto them and assemble
them. and they can get them assembled in um as little as seven minutes from touchdown and they get
those planes uh in the air. The story that the Americans tell is that um the plane was the C130s got
stuck which um on the makeshift landing and couldn't get out. Um, and so they had to destroy
everything and get uh Delta Force uh rescue force to come in on unmarked planes um and extract
everybody that was involved in that operation. Again, lot of information that we don't have yet. Um
we'll stay on top of that story and I think um that story is going to be in the news for quite some
time. um it wrapped by the Americans saying that they had recovered both of the pilots, the both the
pilot and the weapon service officer. There was

a lot of talk all weekend about what it would mean for Iran to capture um those pilots. Um and in
the end uh uh in the end from what we know um the the uh the the rescue operation was according to
the Americans successful uh although full of uh catastrophic mistakes. Um now let's look at the
targeting that we always do the mapping of the targets for Iran and the region. This is the map
we've been using the whole time but it's a good idea. It's a good one for showing you uh the key
bases. Aluade air base in Kuwait and the naval support activity uh headquarters of the fifth fleet
uh the navy that oversees the central command area have been hammered throughout this war. Um the
air bases in Kuwait, you can see the number of them. Kuwait is a key hub um for the Americans since
the Gulf War, but uh particularly

through um the global war on terror as they called it um in Iraq and Afghanistan. Uh Bahrain
targeted, Qatar targeted, the UAE has been hit a lot. Um and we can see those bases um were
continued to be targeted this week. Let's take a look at the missile strikes. I have made you uh
another missile mix um in order to show you basically all of the launches over the past week. Um
there's been more than 100 waves of um ballistic missile and drone attacks. That's how the IRGC has
organized um their uh um attacks under waves. And the waves can be smaller or larger. Um they can
they can go all day. Some waves have four and five parts to them. So, it doesn't indicate the number
of missiles fired um because that varies um throughout the throughout this war um the numbers, but
we're talking dozens um so several dozens and we're talking about

on Israel um air raid sirens in Israel um 10, 12, 15 times a day. Um, they got some different shots
here of the missiles um in the uh in the sunset, I guess you could say. They uh added that uh
artistic flare to see the missile more than just off of the uh ground. These were this for one
example, the 96th wave. Um the IRGC said that it was a response to the enemy attack on the B1 Karaj
Bridge, which was a brand new bridge um leading out of Thrron. Uh obviously a civilian bridge. Um
and in response to that um the Iranians said that they targeted um the they targeted civilian uh
infrastructure in uh various countries. They said a severe attack on a refinery and supplying
supplying fuel for the child killing fighter jets of the Israeli entity in Hifa. Uh an attack on
American gas facilities, Exxon Mobile Chevron located in the

UAE. A missile attack on the prochemical facilities producing fuel materials for the American armed
drones and military products for the Israeli entity in Aro uh United Arab Emirates. Um we can see
these videos uh have changed over the course of this battle. But um always very telling to see the
difference in the missiles launched. We saw their um high-end missile top top shelf missiles like
the Sajil being fired. We saw one Hajkasam be fired which hadn't been used previous in the war. And
um again it matches with Iran's statements that in the beginning of the war they were firing their
old stock um and in the later parts of the war um are getting into their more capable missiles that
are much more difficult to intercept and we've seen that both uh in the Gulf countries but also in
Israel itself. Um just one more of the missile launches. This is uh the view from

Shiraz. Um Ahmed talked about how they have demonstrations on the streets. There's been 100 waves um
of missile attacks. Um there's been 60 waves of army attacks and there's been 40 straight days on
the streets um protesting and in solidarity um with Iran on the streets. And this is missiles fired
over that demonstration in Shiraz. Um, so this is what the people of Iran, this is a civilian camera
um, from people in Iran showing um, the missile launches as Ahmed reported earlier on the show. If
you didn't catch that, um, you should go back and check it out because it's great interview from on
the ground in Iran. Um, let's take a look at the missiles arriving uh, in Israel. We've got audio in
for the next two slides. again. So, you can see just a direct hit. We're looking at from an upper
floor of an apartment building. We watched the red streak um

and then the camera gets blown off the balcony by the blast wave um of that first strike. Let's look
at the second strike. same thing. A strike through uh a civilian area that uh you would be told is
uh targeting civilians, which Iran hasn't done throughout this war um at all. In fact, if we look at
the next slide, you can see what the target was. Um it was the total loss of a drone factory in uh
Petatikva um that was hit by an Iranian ballistic missile. This is a factory of aerosol um aviation.
It builds pilot gear, bomb components, drones, um all of which are for the Israeli uh military. Uh
and you can see that's a direct strike on it, an accurate hit. um clearly the target. Um and so if
Iran wanted to put accurate hits on um apartment towers in Tel Aviv, they can certainly do that. Um
they have chosen

to not do that at this point uh in the war. Um and that is why it's the same in the Gulf. The Gulf
targets have been the same. And that's why across Israel and all through the Gulf, um the numbers of
dead are only in the 30s and most of them are foreign workers. Um I mean foreign workers is a a
generous term to describe uh many of the conditions of the workers in the Gulf countries. Um clearly
being forced to work uh when others are taking shelter. Um but that explains it and you can see here
a direct hit. the factory is basically doesn't exist anymore. Um, a significant warhead uh struck
that. Now, let's look at some drone attacks here coming up. Number 18, I think we're on now. Uh,
IRGC drone attacks carried out by the naval uh force here. Um, targeting HIMAR batteries in Kuwait,
a US Patriot system in Bahrain,

attack missile sites in uh in Bahrain as well. a gathering of senior US comm military commanders in
the UAE. Um the Oracle building in the UAE. So specific targets related always to the targets that
the Americans and Israelis hit. Um these are retaliation retaliatory strikes and uh Iran maintains
escalation dominance when Israel or the US escalate. So does Iran. Uh we can look at the next one is
uh the army because the army is separate from the IRGC but they're fighting their own battle. Number
19 is um Artesh they call the army you can see them launching their Arash 2 drones. These are
specially built long range um uh drones that have stealth capability, solid warhead and are aimed uh
are designed for long range strikes on Israel. um and Jordan because in this case they targeted the
Al Azarak air base in Jordan which is Mouafa Kal Salti which is the key hub for

um as they say a strateg important strategic and command center of the aggressor Israelis uh in the
West Asia region and the Americans that base is used by both of them and as the war has gone on
we've seen more um uh a little more detail we see the the launch crews uh now more um you can the um
their expressions, their comments before launching. Of course, a lot of these drone and missile
strikes are dedicated to uh to martyrs. Sometimes martyrs as recently as a few minutes before the
attack, sometimes going um all the way back to um key resistance figures um all through the battle.
Um and we've seen that all throughout this war. Um the uh attacks on the second part of these uh art
attacks were on prochemical plants after Israel hit uh prochemical plants in Iran. Um and they
responded right away with these hits on prochemical facilities in Kuwait

and elsewhere in the Gulf. Um Netanyahu bragged after hitting the prochemical sites that um he said
that the targeted sites were a money machine that brought in revenue for the uh Iranian government.
At some point somewhere else uh they said that it was $18 billion which is um uh fraction of the
amount of money the Americans have given the Israelis um in their um uh for their allowance. Um so
those are the uh army drone strikes. Um we can look at number 20 here because we got a satellite
footage um of a TH that THAAD another THAAD battery destroyed at Prince Sultan air base in um in
Saudi Arabia. And of course in the statement to the New York Times, Planet Labs, who is the primary
um satellite that uh satellite provider that people used um and the reason why we haven't seen
battle damage assessment since the first week of the war when we

saw them losing literally billions of dollars in radars. Um Planet Lab said to the US government
request was made for safety and operational security reasons. It would be voluntarily we will be
voluntarily withholding imagery over the area indefinitely until the conflict ends and switch to a
managed distribution of image deemed to not pose a safety risk. So not clear what the safety risk is
of showing battle damage. Um they don't obviously need the satellites to target these because
they're uh battle damage assessments. So they already hit it. So, I don't know what uh what argument
could be made for safety. This is clearly naked propaganda and and censorship um following the uh
Israeli uh the way the Israelis uh keep keep the the satellite providers at a distance and why we
never get good satellite images of Gaza. of people wondered why is it that we get this nice clear uh
satellite image where we

never saw anything like that in Gaza. You basically have to um you have to be able to read tea
leaves to understand the distance and the um resolution quality that we get uh on Israeli u
satellite imagery. Okay, let's look at another lost aircraft. A uh a Chinook, US Shinook lost on uh
base in Kuwait. And as we do every week, um number 22 is the Iraqi front. Um the Iraqi front has
been uh ba fiercely battling in this uh in this uh 40-day war so far. They joined immediately on day
one. They've executed more than 850 operations targeting Syria, Jordan, Kuwait, but especially
concentrated on US positions in Iraq and Iraqi Kurdistan, particularly the embassy and the Baghdad
airport. Um those are have been the main targets for the Iraqi resistance. Um and I've shown you one
on each uh of the shows. Um so let's take a look now at Lebanon. And I

will just remind you that you are watching and listening to the electronic inifat. This is the
resistance report for day 916. We're going to look at Hezbollah right now. Um because uh Hezbollah
has been fire fighting a fierce battle against Israel's so Israel suggested attempts that they were
going to take up to the Latani River. We're looking at a map here on the screen that shows Israel at
the bottom. The blue line is the um de facto border. Um and then all of South Lebanon up to the
Latani River. Um Israel said that they were going to hold. Well, they changed their mind this week
that that's no longer the goal. The goal is now simply a 3 kilometer buffer zone uh around the
border to push fire up. And as uh Roa uh Rokaya uh Shamsadin reported for us excellently again for
the second week in a row. You can listen to that along

with Norah's Gaza News report uh reported on the uh massacres of civilians that happened uh
yesterday. a large wave of Israeli air strikes against Hezbollah in Lebanon using 50 fighter jets
dropped 160 bombs on 100 targets within 10 minutes. However, the air force they bragged about it
even more. They said it was 60 seconds. Uh that there's their intention to carry out that heinous
massacre in 60 seconds and they called it uh eternal darkness was the way they named um their
operation. So again, another revealing uh Israeli uh sadism, I guess you could say. Um let's take So
there's five Israeli uh uh divisions that are fighting spread across from Nura, Bintage Bale, and
then up the Galilee panhandle over to uh Meun and uh Hiam that are up on the top of the uh uh
panhandle that you see on the right hand side. And you can see how those places touch virtually
touch

the Latani River. So, Israeli forces are attempting to push forward for a few kilometers, take a
picture on the Latani River, and say they achieved their military goals. But really, this week
during an IDF briefing, um they claimed that they're no longer trying to disarm Hezbollah, which
they said they already did. If people remember back for the last two years, they said they won that
war because they blew up uh a bunch of people's hands with pagers. uh in a mass terror attack um and
they assassinated senior leadership. So they believed that they had won the war. But that was not
the case because in 2024 the 60-day invasion of South Lebanon failed. Israel didn't invade Lebanon.
Um they were unsuccessful. And what they did achieve in Lebanon was to put five advanced military
posts inside Lebanon. But they did that under the cover of the ceasefire. um as Israel is want to do
for

these things um violating the ceasefire in its fundamental way. Um now let's look at the next map
because this will show um you can see it over that previous map. This is where the engagements um
face-to-face fighting has happened from Nakura on the west coast to Bintage Bale um and then up
again up at the top uh in the Marajun area and then up at the very top on the right that's Hiam uh
where they're facing ground forces that are repelling Israeli operations. Um we can take a look at
one of those operations here number 25 we're at now. Um this is in uh T Bay in the uh Marij Jayun
area and you can see a tank here that is withdrawing. Um Israeli newspaper clippings talked about
this operation cuz this was Israeli soldiers fleeing. Um and Hezbollah is showing us that here.
That's a report from uh MCO news that says the vehicles

were left behind. They left three excavators behind um during a panicked withdrawal, a panicked
retreat. Information received by MCO agency indicates that during the attack launched by forces in
South Lebanon, which included deep penetration into hostile territory using heavy engineering means,
uh heavy fire was opened on the forces using mortars, um high altitude rockets, and precision
missiles. The incident did not end at this point. Shortly after the panicked retreat, uh Hezbollah
fighters came down and encircled the uh area um in case the troops came back to get their uh uh
their uh what do you call excavators, front end excavators, front end loaders that they had left
that they were trying to um change the geography of the land in South Lebanon to make it a little
easier for them. Here is how Hezbollah dealt with that. Um, launching here 122 millimeter Grad
rockets, Kushias as they call them in uh, Lebanon. They're actually Iranian

rockets. They're not GRDs. Um, all of these weapons are Iranians built by an indigenous uh, Iranian
weapons industry. And many of them are built by Hezbollah. The drones um and the uh guidance systems
that are added onto rockets for precision to make them precisiong guided missiles. That is all done
by Hezbollah. But you can see here they're pounding them uh at the site with uh with rocket fire.
And rocket fire underpins all of these operations. It's been the thing that they've done the most.
upwards of 7,000 uh rockets and missiles have been fired uh during this part of the war during the
last uh 30 um 38 days. Today's day 38 uh of this battle. Um and you can see that uh this is the
field report because Hzbala puts out these field reports every day. um we log them and track them
and it's how we can uh on this program uh connect the

dots because uh and count the operations and understand uh what's going on in the battlefield
because their command and control is perfectly intact. They're filing these field reports
immediately. They're not delayed. Um they clearly have communication. Now we're watching them walk
through what looks like an abandoned campground. Um but it's where is Israeli forces were setting
up. Yahalom tunnel units. Apparently, one soldier was killed and five were wounded in the uh
artillery and rocket attacks. There's a bridge that they used to get over the river, the river BAR,
um there to cross over um and they were ambushed in this site um and fled. And you can see their
shoes left behind there. Um you can see their belts, you can see their attempts. This is a a a
makeshift bridge um to get over to this area. So, just complete abandonment. And we're going to see
in a moment here as the fighter works

his way along. Um there you see a dinghy used for supplies to get across the river. Um and we're
going to see them walk up here to the excavators. Three uh excavators that were abandoned uh during
the um during the retreat. And the soldier that was killed um was a lone soldier, a foreign fighter
from New Jersey who didn't live in Israel, didn't have any connection to Israel, uh but wanted to go
and fight in Israel's army, and he was killed in this operation. One of at least 13 the Israelis
have admitted to. Don't feel super confident that that's an accurate number. for the Israelis and
the Americans have been very tight- lipped about um the information front in this war. There you
were looking at the uh excavators there left behind. Um that one looks like it had been hit. It's
got broken glass. Um but you can see these are the excavators that

we saw in uh Gaza as well. Caterpillar uh always supporting uh Israeli apartheid and criminal
aggressions uh with their gear. you can see there also blown up uh through the rocket attacks that
are um throughout this whole video. And one of the interesting things that we're going to see
throughout this uh report is that the uh military media department in Hzbollah has given the
fighters cameras in a way that they didn't uh in the previous war. So these are not um official
media these are not official cameramen or um as we can see skilled cameramen um but they are uh
recording their operations and we're seeing things because of that that we never saw in the first
battle in two in 2023 and 2024. Um, Hezbollah was very secretive about uh about the um about the
operations, about the tools that they were using. And now we're getting to see uh a lot more in

these recent videos. Um let's take a look at the number 26. This is the map of um the rocket strike.
So you can see in the bottom of this map there is um an inset map uh zoomed in on the the border
line up at the top. And what Hezbollah is doing is hitting Israeli military positions, troop
movements, makeshift bases. Um, anywhere the Israelis move to, they're being shelled from across the
border. Um, all the way along uh more than 6,500 upwards of 7,000 rockets um have been fired and
they're aiming at troops all along the borders there. And it's been the underpinning um of this
operation uh which has carried which has been uh using all different types of weapons but really
founded on if you look on the left you can see um that the red circles mean uh the dark red circles
mean more than 60 hits on the same positions or

the smaller ones are 30 to 50 hits on the same position. Um 15 to 30 hits on the same position. So,
they're just being pounded uh in uh in their their their rear bases. Um and as we saw in the
previous video, in their forward bases as well, but uh this has been critical to uh Hzbollah's
operations. Let's take a look at this next video because this is going to uh combine all the things
that I just described. Um here's fighters. Uh the first fighter says that um we're going to show you
the outside now. He's talking to the FOD launcher here. This is a uh fatty rocket launcher that is
in a hardened shelter truck mounted. And you can see that he is smashing out the cinder block walls
of the hardened shelter. And that's what the other uh Hezb fighter says. He says, "Let's show it the
outside. Let's show the fatty the

outside because it's been hiding in here uh all this time." And there's the truck um in pretty rough
shape, but it gets the job done. Um there was a long report uh by Hezbollah about another FOD
launcher that uh we'll break down in a future show because there's a lot of detail to it. Um but you
can see there from a hardened shelter. Now we're going to watch the fighters wire it up. We can see
them with their control panels. These are all things that were previously never shown uh in
Hezbollah operations. Um so we're seeing a lot. Um previously we would just see the launch or we
might see the fighters. There you see the fighters give the victory sign before launching. Uh and
this fighter who's got the camera, he says uh he says, "This is my first time uh with the camera, so
if I flinch, don't judge me." Uh as the

Fabi launches u makes a significant noise. Um and he's saying there's another victory sign from the
fighters. So we're really seeing the fighters for the first time um rather than being behind the
fighters uh that we saw in the um the first war. There's the launch. Um, and the, uh, cameraman
didn't flinch. So, uh, good on him for that. But it's important to note that Hezbollah were the
founders of this military media. Um, they did it going back to beta and VHS tapes um that they would
deliver um to um to television stations that would show it to prove their operations against the
Israelis because the Israelis just lie. And then the fighters all get back in the truck and they
drive off. And so this is definitely something we never used to see. Um but they're driving off in
the truck after a successful operation. Um so a very interesting one there. Um the

next one we're going to see the multiple launch rocket system. And this is um what's really again
we're seeing them in the truck on their way to the site. This is dangerous operation. But uh one
thing that we learned from the Israelis and one of the reasons why the Israelis don't think that
they can take the area all the way up to the Latani, well they can't because of the fighters um but
also that they um they can't do it. They would take heavy losses. Um and also they've realized that
uh the rockets aren't fired from south of the Latani. Um these are uh these larger particularly
these larger uh multiple launch they they can be fired from behind the latani river and uh many of
the heavier missiles and rockets that they have have 200 plus kilometer range. So the latani river
isn't any kind of a border. Previously when they only fired Kouta

rockets, it was somewhat useful because of the range of the Kushias, but that's a bygone era. Again,
we get we see in this video um the fighters all around um the the um the launcher. We see what the
circumstances is around the fighters. This is a dangerous moment for them. They've got a Hezbollah
flag hanging off the launcher. They're communicating with each other uh about the launch. Um um
yeah, and Israel says that they that Hezbollah has between 1,000, sorry, between 8,000 and 10,000
missiles left. This is compared to 40,000 um that they had before October 7th. But we know that
before October 7th, Israel said that number was in the many hundreds of thousands. So, um there's a
lot of uh revisionist uh revisionist history going on here because Israel said they defeated
Hezbollah. They clearly didn't. We're seeing Hezbollah fighting at a tempo of operations that we've
never seen before in any of

their previous wars going all the way back to the 1980s. Um the number of operations um in the last
two days before the war there was 160 operations. Here again you can see them pulling up the truck
for another multiple launch. Um and it's just very interesting to see um these details um from the
commanders. Um and this fighter is uh addressing the camera saying that they will not leave uh the
battlefield. Um so significant significant develop developments on the rocket um and uh missile
front here by Hezbollah. Let's take a look at the next one. It's uh this is a remarkable one. Um
we're going to watch them set up here. World War II era field guns um that we're seeing them set up
here that we have never seen before. Didn't know they had. Um but this is for the defense of Bintage
Bale. They said that there are uh fighters uh Israeli

soldiers mustering uh into the south of the town. Um and so you can see the fighters here. They're
talking about amongst each other talking about uh recording this part. Is it okay to record this
part? He's like, "Yeah, it's fine to record it." And you see them setting it up. You see the
cameraman there, uh, again, and these are firing off very rare weapons that I don't think many
people expected to see. Um, this is a KS19 100 mm anti-aircraft gun that's being loaded up here and
being used as an anti-personnel weapon to fire on those troops that are down uh, in this uh,
southern area of Bintage Bale. If this war continues, Bintage Bale will be a major battleground
strategic uh location. A long history of resistance in Bintage Bale. The 2006 war essentially died
uh in Bintage Bale because of the resistance uh there. So the the fight for Bintage Bale will be

significant there. Again, the fighter with the victory signs. We see a little bit of their
personality. We see the details that go into covering this. We're watching a fighter here um remove
the netting that um that covers the the weapon in the forest. They're deep inside the forest here.
Um setting up these guns. Um the second one is 122 mm uh toad howitzer. So a full-on uh World War II
era field gun that they're going to fire with the rope that you can see there pulling it off. And
it's a massive blast. Um but these kind of guns, should they have enough um uh ammunition for them,
will definitely slow the advance of the Israelis. Um although for uh Hezbollah's fighting doctrine,
um they're not they're not treating the Israelis entering uh the town the city the town it's really
a town of Bintage Bale um as uh the defeat. Um they're not fighting for

a single rock. Nasalla said it uh many times before that our fighters are more valuable than a piece
of of stone. So they're not going to hold some arbitrary line. Um they're going to encircle um and
fight a guerilla warfare um that allow that doesn't allow the Israelis to uh take control um of the
city. And when they are in the city, they will be hit um regularly. And you can watch this be fired
um out of the bush and it's pretty remarkable bush that you see there. Um this is the the nature of
the fight in South Lebanon and part of the um significant advantage that Hezbollah has uh on this
territory. Let's take a look at the next one because we are seeing here the underground missile
bases um of the uh Hezbollah fighters. We're watching here um a flashlight fighter walking down into
a tunnel apparatus. He chose one direction, but it

looked like he could have gone two directions. Same with that one there. He could have gone to the
left, he went to the right, suggesting that these missile silos, these missile bases are
significant. They're not single uh they're not single rail. But here, they're now walking in this
cave in this tunnel and they're going to turn here and you're going to see uh the rail launcher here
for the CDER um precisiong guided ballistic missile. There's Immad Magna, the um the military uh
architect of Hzbollah uh uh always saluting the fighters. We saw it in Gaza. We saw it in Iran. We
always see it in Lebanon. But you can see the single rail there. So this is being launched from
underground on a single rail. It can be launched the you saw at each of the turns when he decided to
go left or right. You could see a blast door at each of those

turns. And that's how you know um it's a fully functioning uh missile silo because those blast doors
have to be blocked at all times um for the launch. Um and and it's why the Israelis can't defeat the
missile silos um in Iran. We're going to find that in this twoe period of time, Iran is going to dig
out um their buried silos in so far as they were hit, they can simply be um dug out. And here's
Hezbollah showing um the uh locations of these missiles because they were high-V value targets. They
targeted the Hakiria, the IDF's headquarters, and Aman, their military intelligence uh barracks on
this operation was March 26th. We're getting these videos about a week delayed um about a week after
the operations. We're getting them. And you can see even just from week to week the um the
improvements in targeting and um the uh the tempo of it the number

just a straight number of operations. There you see Nasalla under this. And this second uh 622
millimeter coder 2 that carries a 400 kilogram warhead uh is aimed at uh the human uh shields base
uh IDF base uh in Tel Aviv. the Hakiria the campus is the headquarters of the IDF in Tel Aviv and is
completely surrounded by civilians even though it's a new inst it's an old base but it's uh been
modernized and they embrace the fact that it has human shields uh in downtown Tel Aviv. Number 31 is
a map about anti-tank operations because uh using rocket as cover fire, keeping troops um behind the
lines uh under fire. Um the anti-tank ops are the first level of defense uh of the territory in
South Lebanon. Again, these match up uh pretty straight pretty directly with the uh Israeli areas to
press on. You can see anti-tank operations. This is from the first

month of the war. So this goes to April 1st from March 2nd. Um, and they're they're talking about uh
136 uh Israeli tanks had been targeted um along with uh 25 other vehicles, bulldozers, uh Humvees
we've seen be hit. U but again, that map just gives you a sense of where those anti-tank operations
are. And you can see the massive hole in the middle of what is supposed to be the area uh that
Israel says that it's going to claim. And you can clearly see after a month that they have um barely
ad they've barely advanced because they already were in forward positions inside Lebanon because of
their positions in the ceasefire. Um so they really only moved one ridge forward uh in this entire
40-day battle. Um let's take a look at 32 because the anchor of these operations of course are these
almass attacks, these um uh cloned Israeli uh spike systems. And

this here is the longest we've seen of the setup of the Almas anti-tank guided missile uh launcher.
Here you can see the fighters setting it up. And again, this is just a a totally different view than
we had seen of them before. We maybe got this view that you're seeing here now with the fighter uh
holding on just about getting his readings in and just about to launch. You can see his spotter
beside him. We might have gotten just the front half of that in previous videos, but now we see the
way the tandem the team works together. Um these are uh hunter killer teams uh tank killer teams um
firing these top attack anti-tank guided missiles that come as the name suggests from above which is
um partially designed to um evade uh counter measures uh active protection systems from the Israeli
military. But here we're going to see him put it right through

the hatch uh of that uh Merkova tank there. Uh this operation was in Alba, so right near where the
uh the troops fled from uh earlier on. And again, you see the footage because we're on the missile
with the Almas. Um and number 33, we'll get to these drones. Israel showed us uh the drones that the
quadcopter drones that we've seen um been flying. Uh Israel showed us wanted us to see what they
looked like on the ground. And I'm not sure that that was the best idea because uh what it shows is
a brilliant uh setup by Hezbollah. Clean, smart, cheap, easy to assemble with resilient,
undetectable uh supply chains. They're using common parts that are in all kinds of other things um
that make it impossible to stamp out the supply chain. They're all easily available. And at each
component, at each choice that they've made here, from the battery pack to the

propeller to the brushless motor, um to the weight, the number of batteries per pack, um all of
these are interchangeable and can be uh tweaked as uh necessary for heavier um warheads. And you can
see the warheads there. You may remember those from Gaza. Those are anti-tank warheads. Those are
just single charge 80 millimeter anti-tank warheads, high explosive warheads. Um I I expected we
would see more tandemss like we see Yasin 105s. Um it's possible that Hezbollah just doesn't have a
lot of those because they trained their forces to be tank killers and they use the coret system and
they use the Almas system um which are far heavier, more effective uh systems. Whereas in Gaza, they
didn't have the ability to import. And a smart move for them was to make super light uh very easy to
use uh put it a weapon in the hand anti-tank weapon in the hand of every fighter

that has the ability to penetrate um the merk of a tank um not nearly as much as a cornet or an
Almas. And so it's possible we have seen some tandemss in in Lebanon, but we see Hezbollah using
them for the RPG29 um which is a shoulder fired um system. And it's just far more effective to use
the tandem uh warhead in the RPG29 rather than on these um uh quadcopters that we're seeing. But the
the total build here, these are all parts parts that are costing, you know, propeller, carbon fiber
frame, brushless motor, customizable battery array, uh custom flight controller based on the weight,
the camera, the transmitter, the antenna. All of these choices were smart choices, widely available,
all used in other applications. That's what we've seen for Iran to uh stifle sanctions for the
amenes who are under blockade um to use these parts that are not specific to this one uh

drone like using Chinese G drones that don't allow you this kind of flexibility. So this is really a
brilliant move that um Israel's accidentally showing and presumably showing other resistance groups
um as well. So, it's like, you know, to put this entire package together minus the warhead. Um, it
the range is something you could get them for 150 bucks. Um, the top end of the range was a few
hundred. So, let's say $250 per drone. Um, and they have been really effective. Um, let's take a
look at how effective they've been. I made a um a stitch up here, a mixtape if you will, uh, of a
bunch of drone strikes. And again, look at the topography here that they're fighting in that Israel
has to navigate through these low-lying areas uh in the mountains. Here we're going to see a tank
get hit and aimed at the tracks for a mobility kill of that

tank because as we know from Gaza, Casam never fired these single round warheads at a tank because
they don't penetrate. Um, so what you have to do is you have to pick your targets. You have to hit
tracks. Um, you have to put it through open doors that we're going to see in a bit here. Um, and and
to make them effective because they're essentially carrying an RPG warhead underneath the you can
see the the propellers there on the upper right and the um the anti-tank missile is underneath. So
there we saw the back door of a Nom troop carrier which makes perfect sense. We saw from Casam's uh
targeting documents that the back door is where they are targeting from. Here's a an Eton. This is
the first Eton uh wheeled fighting vehicle that we've seen. But watch, he'll bypass the Eton and go
right into the base and take it right in through

the front door of the base. This is a hospital that Israel is using. They evacuated the hospital,
destroyed it, and now they're using it as a base. um you're going to see the pilots, even just the
development of the pilots in the in the four weeks of this war is significant. Rather than barreling
into that uh target, he's looping around to see if there's a better target. Here he sees uh an
unarmored or lightly armored uh Humvey and it's attacked. So these uh we've seen adaptation of the
uh targeting system as well um un underpinned by the adaptation to create these drones uh in the
first place. Here they're coming down on another set of that looks like a school. Um I couldn't I
couldn't uh pinpoint which school it was, but um they're using them. And here you see them
assembling. Again, something we would never see from Hezbollah. We saw this a little

bit from Casam. um but assembling the uh the drone there from the various parts and it's easy to do.
Anyone can do it. You don't have to have your drone specialists. Um you don't have to have a special
supply chain that could be cut off. Um it's all just really smart um wise way of conducting
guerrilla warfare in the 21st century. And this is a D9 armored bulldozer and an excavator that
we're seeing. Again, Casam would fire this weapon at a bulldozer. So, this makes uh what the
resistance calls an appropriate weapon, uh fit for purpose, if you will. Um so, we've seen those
adaptations. People might remember back a couple weeks ago when I was showing these um we show there
underneath towards the engine, uh trying to hit the engine block for a mobility kill. Early on in
these videos, we saw some of them where they were flying them and just hitting

off the turret of the tank, which is the most heavily guarded or one of the most heavily guarded uh
uh parts of the tank. Now, watch what they do here. There's a Merk of a tank. Watch how the back
door is open and they're going to put it right in through the back door there. and it looks like he
hits the the bottom of the back door, but if you're detonating an anti-tank weapon in the g in the
entrance way of a tank, you're making an absolute mess. And again, casualties just don't match what
we're seeing there. Um, let's look at uh 30. Where are we on now? Is this 36? The Abobil. This is
the Abobil T. This is Hasba built drone. Uh, also you can see with the forward Canard wings there
that distinguish it from the other drones that they fire the side 107. Although we're going to see
side 107s entering

Israel there. You can see the wooden propeller to lower the radar signature on these. Um, they have
a bit more distance um than and can carry a bit heavier uh warhead than the Siad 107s. Um, these are
also built by Hzbollah from Iranian drone um um specs. I'm not sure what the word to use there is.
Um from designs um and this is how the resistance axis is fought and this is the realization of the
resistance axis throughout this whole battle. Um number 37 we are on now. We can see a drone coming
in in Israel. There you can see the Siad 107 flying over. You're going to see the Ratat uh Israeli
flag there. It looks like it's been a tough war for Israel judging by those flags. Um they seem sad.
And then um there's two shots from civilians of the uh Sed 107. And now let's look at some air
defense operations.

Uh number 38 here. Uh we can see them using the MISOG. This is an Iranian uh um uh manportable
surfacetoair missile. There we see the Apache helicopter. They're going to miss uh they're going to
miss the helicopter, but they show us everything that went into setting that up. The helicopter has
a lot of advantages over uh that particular missile. Although you see the helicopter make a uh
beline to land. He didn't want to be up after that near miss. Um but here just let's watch this for
one second. See you can see how they set up and that's something we never would see before from
Hezbollah. Okay, let's look at number 39. This is um the more uh ones we're more used to here uh
through the scope here. Um you can see they're going to use uh here another this is a North Korean
HT pattern manportable air defense system. They're going to fire

it against an Elbit uh Hermes 450. And there you go. Minus one uh Hermes 450, one of four that have
been shot down in the last few weeks. This is a second generation SA18 um manportable uh surfaceto-
air missile man pads as people may see uh jargony people use um direct hit. So, another strike
there. And then one last Hezbollah video because I think this one uh really wraps up how Hezbollah
feels. You're looking at a Fata 110, possibly a Fata 360. Um short-range ballistic missile. Um and
you see they're a fixing a sticker there. You see uh Naim Kasam Nasalla and uh the Virgin Mary. Um
there's Nasalla again on the missile. You see uh there's Musader, Imam Musader there. Um and then um
on this on the missile is a sticker that says um it's for the people of South Lebanon. And the
message says, "You will return to your homes with your heads

held high, oh honorable people of the south." And then it says on the missile launcher it says the
classic Casam line. Uh it was not you who threw but God when you threw. Um so they had that on the
the missile launcher there. And these are very effective short-range ballistic missiles that are the
same short-range ballistic missiles that Iran is firing at the Gulf. Um and so these are doing
damage and these are targeting uh Israeli military bases and installations which we get no coverage
of whatsoever. I showed you that drone factory that got blown up because it was in the middle of a
city. But the bases that are outside of the city, we're not hearing anything about casualties, about
hits. It's all being kept secret. Um, and just on the final note, let's uh turn to Gaza here. Um,
Abu Oda, um, the new Abu Obeda who replaced uh, Huda al Kalut who

was assassinated um, during the war. Uh Abu Oda gave a speech today uh or the other day, two days
ago, um saying that we emphasize that what the enemy failed to take from us with tanks and genocide
will not be taken from us through politics and negotiations. He blessed the people of Gaza for their
steadfastness and sacrifice. Um he said after a war of genocide and ethnic cleansing and some of the
most horrific massacres in modern history, the aggression continues to expand, spreading across the
region. It launched a treacherous aggression. Israel launched a treacherous aggression against Iran
in the most deceptive negotiations in full coordination with the United States. The true nature of
the Zionist entity has been exposed, revealing its weakness and total dependence on external support
for help um for it will not last. Amid global silence and double standards, the world demands
concessions only from the Palestinians. While ignoring the occupation's violations

and refusal to honor agreements, the occupation continues targeting civilians to create chaos,
turning safe zones into death traps, restricting aid and movement. Um he also says that we received
with great pride the message from the Islamic Republic addressed to our people through the
spokesperson uh Ibrahim Zofagari um dedicated to the operations uh dedicating operations putting
them on missiles um to our fallen leaders such sake Ahmed Yasin and Yahinir the actions of the
fighters in Iran, Lebanon and Yemen are extensions of the alaxa flood punishing those responsible
for those war crimes. We declare full support for Lebanon, its people, and its resistance. And renew
our call for the fighters of the Lebanese resistance to turn direct confrontation into a real
opportunity to capture US soldiers. And he ends by saying, "Once again, we emphasize that what the
enemy failed to take from us from with tanks and genocide will not be taken from us with politics

and negotiations. Kasam is not disarming. As you know as a regular viewer of this show, that is the
resistance report for week uh for week six of the Iran war and day 916 of the genocide in Gaza.
