Title: Iran hammers Israel, US bases, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-03-26
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dord3Ef5ELQ
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: earlier context

You are watching and listening to the Electronic Intifada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day 902 of Israel's genocidal campaign in Gaza. It's day 27 of Israel and the United
States war against Iran and it's day 20 for of Hezbollah's defense of South Lebanon against Israel's
annexation plan. Much more on that later in this report. I am reporting this on Thursday the
afternoon of March 26. Things are moving fast quickly, of course. Um but I'll be covering the fourth
week of the war and the fourth week of the war will always be the fourth week of the war. So, here
we go. Let's take a look at the maps off the top. Straight of Hormuz, of course, uh in the news. A
lot of talk about Kharg Island uh that the US is going to uh that the talking head generals say the
US is going to occupy that island. Tomorrow

put a nice little arrow in here for us to show you where that island is up on the uh northern shore.
That's Iran to the north. Um that's the Persian Gulf that you're looking at and you're looking at
that tiny island. Um the island uh Kharg Island isn't it's not an oil um it's not an oil field. It's
an oil terminal. It's where they ship the oil from. So, it's not entirely clear what the US uh
strategic benefit um of that is other than to shut down uh global oil supply which doesn't seem to
be what they're interested in doing considering how much Trump uh manipulates the markets by telling
them what they want to hear. But any case, when you look at that island up there in the top and then
you look down in the bottom right corner of that map, that's the Strait of Hormuz. And the US with
the most advanced

warships in the world are too scared to run the Strait of Hormuz um with those warships. Um but
they're they're seemingly planning uh to land uh forces on those islands to hold those islands. I
mean, the same reason they're not putting a ship through there is the same reason uh why they will
get hammered if they're on those tiny isolated islands. Um they'll be sitting ducks, not only from
coastal fire, um but from fire inland. There's fast boats. Um a lot of talk about the navy being
destroyed is fraudulent because the key part of the IRGC navy um is their fast boats, missile
capable fast boats that are deployed from in those rocky uh shorelines um that are not being touched
by these uh US strikes saying that we've knocked out the entire uh navy of Iran. They've knocked out
ships that were tied up on the shore, um but the most strategic uh weaponry

that the Iranians have is all in place. And when you look at that map and the the gradation, the
over watch um Iran has over this tiny body of water where um 20% of the world's oil uh comes out of,
um you can just see how uh far-fetched, I think. We won't predict again. We're saying we're not
going to predict. Uh the war can always escalate. Uh armies can always do dumb things. Um the US is
uh of course has a long history of doing dumb things and losing. So, we'll see uh how this goes, but
I just wanted to show you that map uh off the top. Um let's look at number two cuz the this is uh
CENTCOM's map. They use the Central Command, the US uh uh body in charge of operations in the Middle
East. This is the map that they show, which makes it all look a little clearer uh

and maybe a little easier to uh to digest, but um again, you can see the tiny area. It's Iranian
coastal waters all through there. Um virtually, it's only a small sliver of it that is not uh
Iranian coastal waters. Um so, Iran has sovereignty over this area, and they have for 4,000 uh years
or so. So, um that's the uh Strait of Hormuz seen from CENTCOM. Let's take a look at this map from
the New York Times cuz we get a little different angle of it here. And again, you can see the
neighboring countries. You can also see if we start from the left and go up, you see the UAE, you
see Qatar, you see Bahrain, too small to even have its uh name written on its island. These are very
vulnerable places that we know, we've watched for the last uh 27 days of war. They're extremely
vulnerable. They're very close. Look it

up. If we continue up to the top, you can see Kuwait. Kuwait has been hammered um during this war.
US bases in Kuwait were a major order or a major node for United States expeditionary planning for
the entire uh like last 40 years, right? Since Desert Storm. Um they've built up uh significant
bases in Kuwait, and those are all being hammered, they're all being evacuated. The troops are not
on those bases by and large because uh it's too dangerous because they're getting pummeled every
day. Um and you can see this map shows the shallow waters, and that's what I was saying about the
previous map that it didn't the CENTCOM map doesn't show you the shallow waters. It doesn't show you
how skinny the strait actually is um because of those shallow waters um and territorial waters. So,
I think that's a good map. You can see the uh the gradation of the land that

gives overwatch for everything that Iran does and uh militarily in that strait. So, the there's
going to have to be a negotiation on the Strait of Hormuz. I don't pre- I don't see the US um
putting warships in there to uh facilitate transfers. On previous programs I've told you about how
they simply did not have enough to do that. Um so now they're talking about a Marine Expeditionary
Unit and the 82nd Airborne coming and what are they going to do? Airdrop them onto those islands? Um
that doesn't seem like a good military strategy. Although I've noticed that on American media
networks the generals seem to really like this plan. go to the next map. >> [laughter] >> Cuz this
is the the this is where how they explain if you look at it at the top there it says small islands
could be seized by US Marines, experts say. So I don't know if they

know that they're going to be occupying those islands that are so small that they don't even show up
on this map. They didn't show up on the map that CENTCOM put of the Strait of Hormuz. So they're
small enough islands that they don't appear on those maps, but they're going to put a bunch of US
troops on those islands uh on the low-lying land. Sun Tzu always said don't fight uphill. Uh and
that's certainly what they would be doing. I think he would probably say don't fight on tiny
isolated islands as well. But I don't think that uh um he got to that analysis, but it's it's just
it it doesn't seem like a plausible military strategy unless um utter defeat is what the US is going
for. Let's take a look at number four. Um because as this has been happening uh Iran has been
already making the strait uh useful. Okay, what this

map shows you even more the gradation. So you can see how the firing positions, that's Iran to the
north there, you can see the firing positions that Iran has down into that strait and compared to
the defensive um positions that they have compared to the Americans being out on those islands just
um in the middle of the sea It just seems like a very uh unlikely military pursuit. But, Trump may
send them there. So, I guess, you know, the other thing is they don't have to always fire from the
coast. I think the US is trying to make the justification that if you bomb all along the coast, that
there won't be missile firing capabilities along the coast. But, that doesn't matter. The those
exact same capabilities can be fired from inland. And in fact, it's those anti-ship capabilities
that have the USS Lincoln a thousand mi a thousand kilometers off the shore of Iran

because it's afraid of those same weapons. And then they're saying that those weapons will be used
now at like literally hundreds of feet or, you know, a few kilometers. So, you can just see that
this doesn't all add up. But, as the last week has passed, Iran has taken the initiative to deal
with the Strait of Hormuz on their own terms. And they we can see that in the next map. They have
opened up what what we're what they're calling what is being called in maritime analysis is being
called the Tehran toll booth. And you could see that ships have begun to move for the first time. I
showed you maps in the previous shows where ships were not moving at all. Some Iranian ships were
moving, but now we're seeing for the first time over this weekend three days over the weekend. We
saw 16 ships move through this new system which brings them

right up into territorial waters in between the two sheltered islands there. And essentially, that
is the way that they can check out the ships to fairly judge who is enemy or not because Iran has
promised that the Strait of Hormuz will be dealt with as a wartime condition. The enemy, the
aggressors uh, are not profiting off of their war on Iran by using Iranian territorial waters, um,
to move their to move their oil. So, that is something that Iran has been clear on, but now we see
Iran taking the initiative to get, uh, oil to market, um, and to deal with the impacts that are
going to be felt and are being felt all over the world because of the US-Israeli aggression. Um, and
Iran is handling that, uh, in their way by opening up this, uh, this toll booth path, um, let's look
at the next slide. Okay, we're talking, uh, uh, air defenses

here. This is a, um, there was a few high-profile air defense, uh, operations last week when we were
on the show, it broke, uh, while we were on air that, um, the Iranians had, uh, hit a US, uh, Air
Force F-35, the first time an F-35 has been touched in battle, um, some debate about whether it was
shot down or, uh, the whether the vernacular should be shot down or, um, damaged, but either way, I
think, uh, what we're talking about is the hitting with air defense systems of Iran, um, the most
stealthy jet, uh, fighter jet, um, and the first time that that jet has been hit. Um, they've also,
uh, we know from previous reports that three F-15s were shot down by Kuwaitis, um, they lost, uh,
another F or they we were we're going to watch flares be fired on a near miss from another F-15.
They've lost a dozen, they've admitted

to a dozen, uh, Reaper drones being lost and an additional one was lost when a ballistic missile
strike hit Muafaq al-Salti airbase in Jordan, which I reported on in in first show telling you that
they had all these assets stacked up on individual on certain bases so that they can defend those
bases um instead of having them spread out over all the bases and Muwaffaq al-Salti in Jordan was
one of those bases where everything was so close together um and a ballistic missile strike took out
a Reaper. The Israelis admit to 20 drones being taken down and we know that these systems to take
down the drones um uh were used in Yemen when the Yemenis um during the battles on the Yemeni front
took down 25 US uh Reaper drones. Um and the US only operates 225 Reaper drones. So, you take the 25
that they're surely underselling to us. Uh you add the

25 on the Yemen front and um they really dig into the uh Reaper supplies of the US. So, um this is
from Air and Space Forces Magazine. A US Air Force F-35A pilot was uh suffered shrapnel wounds after
their aircraft was damaged during a combat mission over Iran on March 19th, people familiar with the
matter told uh Air and Space Forces Magazine. The aircraft later made an emergency landing at an
airbase in the region and the pilot is in stable condition. The IRGC said a strategic F-35 fighter
jet of the hostile American army was hit and seriously damaged by advanced new air defense systems
of the IRGC Aerospace Force at 2:50 a.m. over the skies of central Iran. The The The Iranians say
the fate of the fighter jet is unknown and under investigation. That was their report at the time of
the strike. Um So, let's take a look at that strike cuz we

have footage of that here next. Um so, you can see the the jet in uh IR uh in infrared lock here.
You can see the missile hit um the back of the plane and you can see the plane continue on but you
see it continue on with two streaks of red from the single engine fighter jet. So it's clearly
damaged and the shrapnel wounds to the pilot I think tell us all we need to know about that and this
is not a one-off. I mean we even know back from the Yemen front during the US war on Yemen the
50-day war that US pilots were in missile lock multiple times and it in close quarters evasion of
air defense missiles during that battle and so Iran has much more considerable air defenses so this
is not a surprise that this is happening the day after this F-35 was shot down the Israeli said that
an

Israeli Air Force jet came under anti-aircraft fire over Iran. The military says the crew acted
according to procedures and no damage was caused to the aircraft. So the Israelis are saying that
this has happened many times. Previously they said no Israeli fighter jet has been shot down though
pilots have come under anti-aircraft fire numerous times. In one case the fighter pilot was very
close to being hit is how the Israelis reported it. We have a second one here of an F-35 and we're
going to watch here if you watch in the bottom left there was a missile that went through just
missed it and we're going to see a second one come from the bottom right to the upper left. You're
going to see it miss again but you got infrared lock on these on the the F-35 Strike Eagle here. And
this operation there goes the second missile that missed it and you're going

to see it dump flares here for the third missile that comes in. So um this they were all over this
jet. You see it there. That's the first missile miss, and then you'll see in about 10 seconds from
the bottom right to the upper left, um clipping the bottom left of the box, uh you'll see the second
uh projectile file fire through. Um and these are part of Iran's integrated air defense. They have
several different systems There you saw it again. That was it. And now it's going to dump flares.
Dumping flares is to try to throw off the um thermal tracking of the um of the missile. So,
significant. And then yesterday there was another one from uh civilian um uh from civilian cameras
that showed um an F-18 being clipped uh from the ground. And CENTCOM came out and denied the claim.
They said, "False. The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps announced a US

F-18 uh was struck over um over central Iran using a new advanced air defense system." What is true,
according to them, is no US aircraft has been shot down by Iran. So, they just said answered a
question that wasn't asked. Um nobody said it was shot down, but it was clearly clipped. Um I'll
bring you that footage next week uh once we have that verified and understand what we are looking
at. And the systems that were brought it down, we take a look here um at number 10 at um at the
Majid system. This was uh some discussion about whether this was This is certainly a drone killer
system. Um but they the Iranians have their own indigenous uh air defense systems. Like all of these
systems under sanctions for a generation two generations, under sanctions they have to be self-
sufficient and build their own things. So, they build clones. And you're looking at this

system is built on the back of a uh of a clone of a Toyota chassis. So, um Iran building from top to
bottom their own things. We know that they use man portable shoulder fired systems. I showed you
during the Yemen front they use the track based uh the track launcher for the uh 358 missile. Those
were drone killers. They also have the 359. Um, [snorts] this Majid system is a short range low
altitude system. Um, there was some talk that this may have been uh the system that got the F-35,
but I think we're going to see in a minute the one that actually did. But the Majid is a passive uh
short range air defense system. And passive means that it doesn't have a steady radar signature all
the time. And the way US fighter jets um work is they suppress radar by uh identifying enemy radar
and suppressing it. So, if the

Iranians don't have that radar on to not allow it to be targeted, and they wait in an ambush
essentially in a guerrilla style ambush. They pick an area where they believe uh you know, through
intelligence, that the fighter jets will go. Maybe it's to high value targets. And they set up an
ambush with multiple systems in that area. And when the jet approaches, they fire up the radar so
fast, launch the missile 1 to seconds, um and then they turn it off again. And you can see with the
truck there, they can scoot out of there um to prevent um counter battery fire. So, uh this is a a
really useful system. This system is for sure killing drones. Um, uh I don't think that this is the
system that uh ended up getting the F-35 um because Iran sort of tipped their hand the other day.
But there's one more shot of the um

of the Majid working here. Um, you can see it launching its missiles. And the uh the uh the Israelis
said that they've destroyed 85% of Iran's air defense and detection systems, which is absurd. It's
not close to the number. Uh it's an entirely made up number because they don't know the number uh,
that they Iranians have. So, you have 85% of an unknown number. Uh, but it sounds good when you're
uh, telling your people why um, when you're trying to leave the war and you want to claim victory.
Um, so this Majid system again, top to bottom indigenously made Iranian system. Um, we look at the
next system here. They have larger systems. These are more long-range uh, systems. Um, but they
operate the same way uh, passive radar. Um, so their radar's not on at all times. They click it on
um, when the uh, fighter jet comes into the ambush zone. Um, and

launch. If we look at the next one, this is what it the Iranians suggest that it was. This is the
Khordad 15. Um, it was launched in 2019. And we know that only because the Iranians implied it. They
didn't actually say it, but they showed a video um, of the uh, IRGC Aerospace Force Commanders
underground in a massive underground facility with that was stacked from floor to ceiling on both
sides with interceptor missiles. Um, and then they showed this truck uh, buried in this uh, uh,
underground system as well. And then at the end of that video, they put up a bunch of clips of the
uh, F-35 from the news from newspaper reports. So, they're suggesting that it was the Khordad 15.
Um, but any those systems working together including shorter shoulder fired um, can hit. Uh, but of
course, these massive systems are much more effective. Um, and and that is what Iran

means by integrated air defense system. It's both the IRGC and the um, Iranian army that are um, uh,
carrying out the rather than the Israeli model and the American model of creating a total umbrella
um, the way that the integrated air defense system works. It's not for every plane at all times like
Israel and the US is are but it's set up in these ambush styles where you have multiple overlapping
systems that can communicate with each other and fire multiple multiple of them can fire on the same
system and that's what we saw with that F-35. So we'll keep following this there'll be more cuz this
is just the beginning of of knocking these of touching these fighter jets because as the war goes on
the patterns become more predictive the intelligence becomes deepened and remember that Iran has
watched the US in Afghanistan and Iraq for an entire generation studying these things so and

they have been prepared for this war as we all know. So let's take a look at the target maps here
cuz we're going to move on to the Iranian strikes. These maps of the main areas that are targeted of
course Bahrain has the fifth fleet the naval command for central command Qatar has Al Udeid airbase
Prince Sultan airbase in Saudi Arabia is where they have concentrated forces that's where one
missile hit the runway and took out five KC-135 strategic air refuelers. You can see the dot in the
middle of Jordan there is Muwaffaq Salti airbase where they are also concentrated and then more
forces are concentrated at Ben Gurion for the Iranians part just to touch on the human rights
situation the head of the Iranian Red Crescent Society said on Tuesday that the US and Israel had
targeted 17 centers affiliated with the Red Cross across the country 94 ambulance and relief
vehicles were

directly targeted the deputy head of Tehran emergency said that the US and Israeli terrorists had
attacked 21 ambulances, 23 emergency bases and a 26 in the first 26 days of the war. The deputy
health minister said 190 medical centers were damaged or destroyed, 12 hospitals have been taken out
of service, 190 health and medical centers have been damaged due to American Zionist attacks, and 12
hospitals, as I said, have been taken out of service. So, typical typical Israeli war. Go for the
hospitals. And use human shields on your own side, which we will see coming up. According to Haaretz
yesterday, Iran has fired 460 at least ballistic missiles at Israel. And at least as many more, 600
plus in the Gulf. Along with more than 4,000 drones at this point. So, this map shows you where
those bases are. Some of those bases are, and again, in Kuwait, there's multiple bases that are
being hammered.

Constantly. So, let's take a look at the number 16 here. This is part of the way that Iran has
evaded air defenses is by launching these drones, and they launch them in and attack the same area
as the ballistic missile. Attacks are targeting. We see the first fighters here that we have seen so
far in the war this week. They showed up. We have a couple clips of them in There you see the
canister launched multiple launch Shahed drone system. Here you see a fighter counting down. He's
saluting the martyrs. Qassem Soleimani, of course, gets a significant shout-out in this countdown.
And then he's going to launch from this canister multiple drone launcher. Here. And the idea is to
hit in waves. Um So, the Iranians said in this operation by ready and steadfast units of the IRGC
Navy, six support hangers of the Americans in the Al Al Udeid base were struck by loitering

munitions and cruise missiles and some equipment of the Patriot air defense system stored in the
hangers were completely destroyed. So, they use uh the multi-layered attack uh with these drones and
these drones have been very effective. They're very accurate. Um and they require fighter jets or $5
million interceptors to shoot them down. Either fighter jets firing Sidewinder missiles that are
like uh half a million dollars each. Um They fire multiple of them. Um or they fire millions of
dollar interceptors at them uh in order to try to knock them down. So, let's take a look at number
17 cuz this is the wave. Um They were now up to the 82nd wave as of uh yesterday. Um These are waves
60s through 66 through 78 that happened last week and you can see them all. Um we're seeing the
Khorramshahr, the Fateh, Fateh, Ghader, Imad, if you're keeping track at home. Then four straight
Ghaders,

Khaibar Shekan. You're going to see a drone mixed in. This is my edit uh of all the operations. Um
So, you're seeing basically all of the missiles being used uh in these launches. Um And this week's
targets were Dimona. A lot of targeting of Dimona. Um which is where Israel's um nuclear research
and nuclear weapons program research um institutes are and those were targeted because of the
targeting of civilian uh nuclear facilities uh in Iran. Um [snorts] And these waves targeted Ben
Gurion Airport that we see all the time. Haifa has been targeted every day. Um and Israel is getting
about 15 of these barrages each day, um, spread out throughout the day, but sometimes, um, sometimes
clustered together. Yesterday, there was 15, um, in just over a 12-hour, uh, period of time,
according to the Israeli Defense Forces. Um, there's the single drone, um, and now we're back to,
uh, ballistic missiles. There you

can see there, the Ghader, um, and it's the going to be the Ghader that you're seeing there, that is
going to hit, uh, Dimona. Um, and those are the the ones, there's a Khorramshahr 4, um, being
launched. I think that's a Khorramshahr 2, there's a whole series of those, and that could carry a
two, um, a two, two-ton warhead, so a significant, um, a significant missile, and their most recent
missiles. Those are the Fattahs, you can tell the Fattahs cuz they have the low trajectory, um, and
the solid fuel, um, uh, like white smoke solid fuel coming from behind them, that's how you can
identify them. You can also identify them by their warheads, which are slightly different. Um, but
this is just to give you a sense, this is what, this is every video that we saw this week since you
last saw, uh, you last saw me, although they have been communicating in

some of these videos. Um, there goes a Fattah there. Um, that you can see. Um, significant missiles
with, um, warheads that range from 750 kilos to, um, yeah, like to to the two-ton, uh,
Khorramshahrs. That's another Fattah, again, you can always tell those. Um, and those are, they
travel at hypersonic speeds, Mach 16 in flight, and Mach 5 in its terminal phase. They're very
difficult to intercept because of that speed, they can also alter their course in mid-flight, which
means that if you're tracking them from long-distance radars and attempting to hone your your closer
radars using the the early warning radars, the early warning radar will pick up the trajectory and
in the second stage, the missile will move, which will completely change the radar signature that is
coming into the close-in radars that Israel is using. Um uh up around for for frontline operate for
frontline interceptions. So, let's look at the let's look

at number 18 here. This is a Ghader, a Fattah, and an Emad that were launched towards Dimona on the
weekend and we'll show them going out here and then we'll show them coming back in. Worth noting,
The Economist wrote up the costs of the interceptors. Um they believe that at least 150 Thad
interceptors, those are the the high-altitude interceptors, the most expensive. They could be up to
30 million a unit. That 150 have been used so far in the first few days and when they used 150 in
the last True Promise 3, that was said to be a quarter of US stocks. So, it sounds to me like
they're well below half of their total inventory now, only 2 weeks into the 3-week 4-weeks into the
war, but this is only covering the first 2 weeks. The cost of replacing the first 4 days worth of
munitions was 26 billion dollars. America's thought to have

used 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles in the opening day, but the Pentagon had planned to buy just 57 in
this coming fiscal year. There have been no delivery of Thad interceptors since 2023 and the
Pentagon has not placed any new orders this year. According to the Economist, a puny 39 interceptors
were slated for delivery in 20 uh 27, 6 years after they were being ordered. So, they're using these
munitions that they cannot replace uh that will not be replaced for many, many years and
significantly weaken the uh air defense systems of the US, of Israel, and of US allies uh all over
the world, not just in the Gulf, um although they had taken the Patriot batteries from other places
in the world um and dropped them uh into the Middle East after uh radars were destroyed. Let's take
a look at number 19. It's going to have audio. Um this is the missile incoming into

Dimona. So, that's one of the better uh camera angles that we have seen for sure. Um you know, it's
we're relying on people's cell phones, so when people catch them on their cell phone and do a good
job um it's always uh I always give them a nod because it's uh uh there we got a lot of terrible
ones, so and um so, that's on Dimona. Um there's a second strike on Dimona, also audio in. Let's
play that. So, that's a 750 kilo warhead hitting uh Dimona and the nuclear research, aiming for the
nuclear research sites um uh associated with Dimona, and we have one more that came in um in Arad,
which is just a little bit south um and this next one here you'll see with no audio pretty
significant strike again. Um you know, we've been showing you a lot of mister missiles with
submunitions, um but these are are heavy warheads

hitting that have uh significant blast radiuses in the, you know, scores of meters, if not hundreds
of meters, of um of destruction zone. And on this one, um on this these weekend of hits on Israel,
um the Qassam Brigades spokesman Abu Obaida spoke up on Dimona, "We view with immense pride the
powerful missile strikes carried out by the uh by Iran's Revolutionary Guards this evening targeting
areas deep within the criminal entity. Um this enemy understands only the language of force and
responding to a a blow with two and making it the price uh making the price a heavy price is what
will force Israel to stop its aggression. Without that, it will continue to rampage and target Arab
and Islamic nations one after another." Um so, that's I think a fairly accurate statement by Abu
Obaida. Um let's take a number let's take a look at 22 here because this is the submunitions coming
from

the Qiam Shahab 4, as I've shown you a number of times, but look there in the right. That is uh Iron
Dome interceptors that are you can see they're having a really hard time understanding the
assignment here. Um this is the first time we have seen the Iron Dome used against the submunitions,
and you can see um they are uh flailing. I don't know if that's a military term, but they are
flailing. Look at they're going back and they change directions to go the opposite way as the
missiles uh all fly by them. So, uh doesn't appear that the Iron Dome uh is up to the task, judging
by these uh images. You can see the bottom there the right two that almost bounce off the wall
there. Um those are the uh Tamir interceptors. Um And you can see the missiles just flying all by
there. Um number 23 here, we're going to see

one of these interceptors fall in into Haifa. Okay, right in the downtown Haifa, which is what
Israel and Trump always accuses everyone else of doing, firing rockets uh that hit their own people,
even though they never show footage of that actually happening. Um but here, we've seen a bunch of
these. I just thought I'd bring one uh to show you. It's a pretty clear one. I mean, the other day
uh on the Lebanon front, Israel shelled uh uh uh kibbutz on the border and killed an Israeli um
firing five shells of friendly fire. Uh but you can see the Tamir uh interceptor crashing down in
front of That's a taxi driver just sitting there in his car. Um and let's take a look at this next
one cuz this is um number 24 here, we're going to watch um Bahrain and the US um send a $5 million
interceptor uh into a neighborhood in Bahrain.

Do we have that, 24? So, yeah, there you go. $5 million interceptor uh fired directly into the
community in Bahrain. Uh the Middlebury Institute um confirmed that this was uh a PAC-3 launched
from a Patriot um and that um 60 residents were damaged and 30 people were wounded. They're from the
Middlebury Institute. But in an ex post on March 9th, the day that this happened, US Central Command
denounced Iranian and Russian news reports that said the incident was the result of a failed
Patriot, calling it a lie in Trumpian all caps, and said that it was an Iranian drone, which you can
see here it clearly wasn't. Um and even after this report came out, Bahrain spokesman doubled down
um, and said that the any suggestion of a factual of a malfunction or misfiring Patriot in Bahrain
is factually incorrect. Uh, so you just watched uh, something that the Bahrainis believe did not
happen. Um,

one of the joys of reporting this war filled with lies. Um, okay, let's take a look at number 25.
So, this is the this is Israel and the US using Tel Aviv as a human shield. Um, this is uh, track
flight tracker data of KC-135 strategic air refueling aircraft. It's these aircraft up in the air
that allow the fighter jets to stay up in the air, allow the fighter jets to get the distance they
need to get to Iran. Um, without these uh, this war could straight up not happen. Um, and you can
see the the amount of travel uh, just this just one example of a window um, that you can see the
flight path and um, it's just really remarkable. Obviously, they're uh, this is always what they do,
project the things that they do and say everyone else does them. Uh, firing missiles on themselves
and using uh, Tel Aviv um, as

a human shield, using a civilian airport um, to to host these uh, KC-135s which I showed you on the
first report about the build up to a war. Um, when we saw them on the runways um, uh, at Ben Gurion,
we saw scores of them all lined up uh, using a civilian airport. So, when we look at 26, um, this is
Iranian Army Arash 2 drones and they're pointedly saying that they are firing these at Ben Gurion
Airport. Um, and these are uh, uh, they're drones um, but they have a pilot. They can be um,
navigated with a pilot down onto their targets. They're almost cruise missiles. They carry fairly
heavy payloads and they're they can cover the ground to Ben Gurion and so we're seeing that pop up
in their field reports constantly every single day that they're targeting Ben Gurion with drones and
missiles and of course also part of this operation was

target Rafael Industries Israel's defense manufacturer. And one of the most important defense
technologies um outfits in the regime and of course it uh produces the Iron Dome David's Sling anti-
missile systems among others and so targeting the um industrial base of the Israeli military with
these strikes. Let's take a look at 27 and move to Iraq because we also have Iraqi resistance
operating on the Iraqi front launching these Shahed 101 drones that you're seeing here launched and
this is just a single group's operations. The Iraqi resistance has executed more than 500 operations
since this war started but this one particular group Guardians of the Blood Brigade they have
targeted um Iraqi These are the targets Iraqi Kurdistan they they target Erbil in Iraqi Kurdistan
where the US has multiple bases 53 drones and two missiles at Iraqi Kurdistan Camp Victory base in
Baghdad at the Baghdad Airport 25 drones and six missiles in Syria nine drones

and two missiles Saudi Arabia 11 drones 11 drone operations Jordan 19 drone operations against
Muafaq al-Salti and also at US positions in Kuwait eight operations so that's significant. And this
next one, 28, a little bit of ingenuity here. We're seeing a Peugeot launched multiple launch rocket
system. So they brought this right up to the gates of Camp Victory at near the Baghdad Airport and
launched from the trunk of the Peugeot multiple launch rocket systems, which I mean, it's an
effective way to get them up to the front door. Nobody thought that that was a rocket launcher while
it was driving into the site. And there's one more there that you can see. Obviously, the car burns
when you fire rockets out of it. But that's the just a notable operation in Iraq that I wanted to
show you. Creative. Now let's take a look at Lebanon. I think this is a really important front that

we need to be focusing on. Israel's plans are very clear that they want to occupy all the way up to
the Litani River that you can see there is all the pink area in the south. They have evacuation
orders to the to the river to the north of the Litani, but they're going to create, they they say
that they're going to create they're going to annex this territory. They call it a buffer zone, but
they're intending to annex this territory including the major city of Tyre, Sur in South Lebanon,
Nakoura's a and a big city as well as Bint Jbeil is of course famous for the battle in 2006. So uh
we can see on this next map that where Hezbollah's operations were yesterday, they carried out 90
plus operations over the 24 hour window and you can see them concentrated there. And where these
concentrations are are where the Israelis made positions after the

ceasefire. There's five positions um, that Israel made, One on the coast there in Naqoura where you
can see, um, getting hit. Um, there's one in the middle area there that you can see getting a lot
of, uh, attention as well. And then up in the Galilee panhandle, if you follow the Galilee panhandle
up, um, you can see that there's three positions along there and they're attempting to move ridge by
ridge. Um, this map has, um, the, uh, the contours of the land so you can see, um, the fighting is
happening now on the third ridge. And this is the ridge that the Israelis would have, uh, taken in
the previous battle, but they were repelled by Hezbollah. And as you can see by a single day's
operations, um, that they're being repelled, uh, as well right now, um, at the beginning of this
war. Um, yeah, we can look at the next, uh, slide. You

can see they celebrated this. They celebrated 87 and then they went on and carried out eight more
operations, um, before the night, uh, closed. Um, but they fired on 21 Merkava tanks, three, uh, D9
armored bulldozers, two Humvees, um, and their operations were focused 60%, uh, or sorry, 60 of the
87 were, uh, inside, uh, of Lebanon. So targeting Israeli troops inside of Lebanon, but also 34
operations, uh, in Israel. And so far we've seen about 50/50 split between those, uh, operations.
But yesterday was definitely focused on the soldiers that are now moving into Lebanon. There's five
divisions of the IDF, um, in, uh, moving into South Lebanon right now, um, which could amount to
something like 100,000 troops if it's a full complement of each division. It's not clear that at
this point that that is what it is, but they are five divisions right now on the border. This, um,
mocks this poster

um, that the resistance released mocks Benjamin Netanyahu saying this is this This is no longer
Hezbollah itself. We pushed their capabilities back decades. And I mean, you could have picked any
number of comments from Netanyahu saying that they had defeated Hezbollah. They clearly have not.
Hezbollah has carried out 811 operations in the 24 days since they joined the battle. So, let's take
a look at 31. Um, This is the Qasmieh bridge, a crucial bridge on the coastal road. You can see
they're destroying This is Israel destroying it. They've been attacking the bridges. They attacked
something like 10 of the 18 key bridges just in the first day. And they're going to continue to
attacking these bridges. Um, Israel's defense minister said that the bridges Hezbollah, which I'll
comment on in a minute, but he also says that he's instructed the army to accelerate the destruction
of Lebanese homes in the line of contact villages. So,

the villages in South Lebanon to thwart uh threats against Israeli communities in accordance with
the model of Beit Hanoun and Rafa in Gaza. So, they're going to destroy everything in South Lebanon.
And to say that the bridges were Hezbollah is interesting because Hezbollah there's a a saying in
South Lebanon where people say everything is Hezbollah down here, even the rocks. And it's an
allusion to Hezbollah using rock decoys as IEDs or as listening devices that look like rocks but are
actually resistance fighters. And so, to hear Israel's defense minister who knows nothing about
defense and is just a lackey for Netanyahu say that the bridges are Hezbollah is is uh made me think
of that. And now let's look at 32. We can see an ambush of uh Merkava tanks here. We're going to see
them from far away. I talked to you about this last week about why there's not cameras up close um

because of the distance that the troops are from each other, because of the landscape of the land.
We're looking at thermal imaging in the middle of the night here, and we see six tanks being uh
shown in red. Um you're going to see those tanks get fired on there. Um the first one fired on.
Three of them are hit here as we watch it unfold. Um you can see the thermal there on those two
clearly being hit um and burning. Um there again from a different angle of the two burning. Um this
was part of a larger operation where six tanks were hit in 90 minutes um around 1:00 a.m. um last
Thursday morning. Um and the thermal imaging shows the three burning tanks. And at the end here,
you're going to see um well, there you see more of the burning tanks, but you're going to see
soldiers um dismounted running away um presumably

because their tank's not uh the best way to uh move through the territory as it's burning, clearly.
Um and that's what we see uh on this. We're going to see after this burn, we'll see the soldiers.
You'll be able to see them running uh fleeing the battle space uh without the tanks on which they
rode in. There you can see that There's the soldiers moving. You can see their little heads. Uh You
can see their little heads running there, particularly in this the one that's second from the right.
You can see the soldiers running uh because they have lost their chariot. Uh pun intended. Okay, um
let's look at 33 cuz we have an anti-tank guided missile strike against a D9 bulldozer, again at
distance. Um it the fighters aren't uh at this point, although we did see fighters with RPG-29s um
in in Israeli propaganda footage of uh of a position that they overran

and found weapons, and one was an RPG-29. Um but you can hear you can see here the D9 armored
bulldozer that we're so used to uh in Gaza uh being hit and will be a factor. There you see it being
hit, and there's smoke coming up. Um these D9s presumably will be playing a role in Lebanon if
destruction is really the Israeli intention, but Hezbollah has a lot more sophisticated and deadly
anti-tank uh weaponry than uh Qassam had in Gaza, and we know how the the D9s fared in Gaza, not
super well. Let's go to 34. Um this is a concealed launcher. Um you know, people say, "Oh, well, uh
the Israelis can see everything in South Lebanon." I mean, they clearly cannot. That's how you
execute 90 operations in a day. Um but you can see these fighters, they're fully concealed here in
the bush, in the mountains, um using the landscape like proper

guerrillas uh to their advantage um and firing from these concealed uh spaces, which make
counterfire um a lot more difficult. So, again, these guys are launching Grad call them Grad rockets
uh naming them after Russians. I mean, the um Lebanese call them Katyushas, but these are Iranian
rockets. We're watching Iranian weapons being used in this battle um from Iran uh through uh the
Iraqis, and of course, Hezbollah as well. Um so, that's how they conceal um and uh Hezbollah has
launched 3,500 rockets since this in the last 24 days, which is more than they were that were
launched in the July 2006 war, and more than 700 of the rockets as of a week ago were fired from
south of the Litani. So, they're firing rockets from south of the Litani at Israeli positions on the
along the border of troops that are attempting to advance into Lebanon. Let's look at 35 cuz you see

a tunnel-based drone swarm attack here. When Israel saying that they have knocked out 95% or 90% and
they make up these numbers, they don't know how many there are. They don't know where these tunnels
are and these tunnels are stocked with weaponry. In this case, we're seeing Shahed drones or Saeed
107s in the Hezbollah lexicon. And you can see them in a fully full underground system tunnel
network system that connects to bases to to rearming where fighters can be safe to plan these
operations. They come out, they're concealed, they're coming out in the forest and launching these
drone attacks. And these drone attacks are accurate and they're hitting Israeli bases. This is
against an Israeli base in the upper Galilee in the upper Galilee, the Alexandroni Brigade base is
being hit with these drones. So, sophisticated capabilities and also just a show that there is more
behind what we're seeing right here. Let's look at

36 cuz um Hezbollah's pulled out the short-range tactical ballistic missiles. We're watching the
missile launcher truck here. We're driving with them to the launch site. So, not only are they not
being seen, but they're literally driving trucks um with launchers on the back. Um and there you can
see uh Hashem Safieddine and um Nasrallah and uh Naim Qassem, the leaders uh of Hezbollah. Two
assassinated and the current leader. And this is the launch of a Fateh-110. This is a precision-
guided ballistic missile um with a 500-kg warhead. These are devastating weapon. They're very
accurate. And they are what Iran used to devastate the Gulf uh um when the Gulf uh when when Iran's
uh gas field was targeted and they responded, they used these Fateh-110 ballistic missiles and they
were not they were not able to be intercepted by the PAC by the Patriot missile defense system and
that was said over and over by um

by analysts of uh from those particular countries that they were clearly missing. Um okay, one more
37 here is um this is a another Fateh class. You can see there in Haifa. We're going to a secret
base. This base is classified. It doesn't exist. Israel doesn't say it exists, but here Hezbollah
puts it on a map for you and then hammers it with uh precision uh guided Fateh 110 uh ballistic
missiles. Could be a Fateh 360. We haven't actually seen the full dimensions of it, but uh Hezbollah
hadn't had Fateh 360s before. They have had Fateh 110, so um if they do have 360s, they uh that's
the first time that the that we've known them to have them. Uh but these look like 110s to me. Um
they there's very little difference between the two observable. Um Atlit Naval Base that is being
targeted here is the home of uh Israel's tier one special

forces, their naval commandos Shayetet 13 or Flotilla 13. These are um Israel's heroes who sack
hospitals and take pictures of it in Gaza. Um they are the hospital sackers. That was their job all
throughout the Gaza genocide. Sack hospitals, take pictures inside. Um and many of the doctors um
disappeared and haven't been um heard from since. Um that's their tier one special forces. That's
that's what that's that's what they do. Um let's look at 38 um because we're seeing a Fattah again
being launched um against a Israeli drone command base uh east of Safed in then upper Galilee. Um
we're also going to see a Pava cruise missile which is um one of the cruise missiles that was used
in True Promise um one, two, and three when uh Iran fired them. So, a lot of Iranian weapons here
with Hezbollah as we have long known. Um and they um on the cruise missile after

they launch it, you're going to see um the face of the martyr here. Um he's a mujahid engineer uh
Ahmad al-Musawi and he was killed in 2024 in the previous round of war. There's the Pava cruise
missile turbojet engine uh extremely accurate, can be steered while it's in the air to get it on its
target. Um a significant weapon to that are being fired at these bases. They're hitting the bases
and we're not hearing anything about it in Israel. I think that there is censorship right now in
Israel beyond what we have um ever known um to happen in Israel. We still do get um some of these
videos um for sure when they hit cities, but out in the bases, it's a little more difficult and that
will be Well, they took the satellite images away from us, so we can't use satellite images to see
the damage and that was of course the

whole point. Yeah, one more rocket operation that's I think I just bring you a cross-section of
operations, but this one is is remarkable. You can see them loading up the Grad rocket launcher,
multiple rocket launcher. That's putting the fuses on them. We saw that happen in Gaza as well with
the rocket artillery. They're going to launch these through this launch panel and then look at this
Nasrallah banner blowing in the wind as they um as they make film and make a film for us. This is a
film of the resistance and Hezbollah does a really good job of this, of course, as Hezbollah is the
founder of this military media operation because they knew that Israel lied so much that the only
way you could show your your your successes is to record them. It was Hezbollah with VHS tapes that
started this process and here they are um doing it um in these wars

and they're giving us more footage in this war than we see than we saw in the previous rounds. So,
intending to show us as much as they can. >> [snorts] >> Okay, one more number 40. The last one here
is a man portable missile surface-to-air missile shoulder fired. You're going to see him tracking a
Hermes 450. The Hermes is a Elbit drone, but it's slow, it's low and these Iranian um anti-surface-
to-air missiles, anti-aircraft missiles are going to do a number on the drones for sure and Iran
also has the 358, which is what took down the Hermes 900s in the previous rounds. There you can see
the drone falling to pieces. And the Misagh is made by Shahed Industries, the same industry that
makes the drones. And so you're seeing the Iranian indigenous military industrial complex
functioning on all these battle fronts of the resistance axis. And it's significant that Hezbollah
is fighting this furiously

to change Israel's war plan in South Lebanon. Israel has wanted the Litani River to be its border
for most of the existence of the state of Israel. So this has been the resistance report for day 902
of Gaza of the genocide in Gaza and day of Iran's resistance to the US Israeli attacks on them.
