Title: Iran missiles, drones batter US bases, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-03-12
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fd7Zg63rsNU
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: earlier context

You are watching and listening to the Electronic Intifada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day of Israel's genocide in Gaza. It's the 13th day of the US uh and Israel's war on Iran
and 10th day of uh this newest ground um of the war in Lebanon. Um I am reporting this on the
afternoon of March the 12th. Things are moving quickly, uh but this report is covering the second
week of the war. Um we'll start with the maps as we always do. We got some new fresh ones for
everybody to see. Targeting um of US positions across the region, particularly in the UAE, Bahrain,
Kuwait, um Qatar there, Saudi Arabia. Those are two critical bases and the CIA station in Riyadh
that you see there targeted. Um up through Kuwait has been hammered. Kuwait is a major hub of US um
forces in the region and has been since the early

1990s. Uh a lot of targets all over all over Iraq. Uh American bases all over the the region uh of
Iraq from the 2003 war. And then of course you can see Jordan there. That's Muwaffaq al-Salti
airbase that is the key expeditionary airbase for the United States Air Force right now. Uh and it's
been targeted numerous times. We're going to get into what was targeted on those bases coming up.
But if we take a look at the next map, you can see a little bit of a zoom in on first this shows
just the proximity uh of these targets. Um Bahrain, Qatar, UAE. We're looking at a map that shows
the Strait of Hormuz and Iran at the top just um within 50 uh to 100 km from these uh major US
installations, multi-billion-dollar installations that are just getting hammered uh right now. Um
and uh the as Ali reported in his uh solid report,

uh the IRGC has promised not a leader of oil um that will benefit the US, the Zionists, or their
partners will pass through the Strait of Hormuz, but they've done that verbally. Um there has been
no uh very limited military action. A couple of tankers, a number of tankers have been targeted, US
uh flagged tankers. Um but you can see the Strait of Hormuz, how tiny it is on that map, and that
includes the territorial waters of Iran. If we look at the next map, you can see it from an even um
This map shows again the targets in the region with a little bit more uh colorful outline. There you
see the embassy in Riyadh. The CIA station was hit there, and that forced all CIA stations in the
region to evacuate. Those are mostly set up in the embassies and consulates. So you can see them
targeted uh on this map as well.

And then this next map shows you um This shows you the topography. And again, I don't want to
predict the war can spiral out of control. But when you look at this map, first of all, the Strait
of Hormuz is shown there in the dead center. When you take the territorial waters of Iran into
question, you're talking like uh hundreds of feet um of area that is international waters, easy to
be closed. You can see that escorting uh ships escorting uh tankers through that are going to be
running a gauntlet um of anti-ship missiles that are firing um in some distances as as close as you
can throw a baseball it looks like from this map. But also look at the country of Iran when we're
talking about a ground war. You're talking about mountainous region. Um the core of the US forces
are down in the south. The capital is up in the north,

also surrounded by mountains. Um it's just a completely different story than um smashing Libya or
smashing Syria, which itself took a decade uh to do. And you look at a full state like Iran, the
size of the country, the depth that they have of human resources and uh military hardware. Um this
war could escalate, but you can see the reasons why it may not when you look at um at this map there
that you're seeing. Um And I just want to start here with a little bit of what the Americans and
Israelis are doing. If we look at number five, they decided this week to target uh oil depots. Um
Strikes me as a sign of desperation to be hitting these um installations so early. Um things are not
going as planned for the US um and Israel. And this was Israel targeting these. Um According to the
Israelis, they have 80% of their air

force um targeting Iran and 20% targeting Lebanon right now. This happened on the weekend. The Red
Crescent reporting 14,000 housing units damaged. Um Um 29 hospitals targeted, nine of them destroyed
or out of service. 65 schools targeted. Um so we're seeing again Israel uh being Israel here. Um
let's look at number six cuz of course this is basically chemical warfare. On the night of March 7th
to the 8th, um Israeli air strikes hit multiple fuel depots and refineries across Tehran and the
neighboring Alborz province, igniting vast pools of crude oil and refined fuel. The burning oil was
sent into towering black plumes into the sky, releasing massive amounts of toxic hydrocarbons along
with sulfur and nitrogen oxides into the lower atmosphere. And we're looking at a graphic here put
together by Reuters that shows uh the toxic plume uh taking over a city uh a city itself of 10
million, metropolitan area of 20 million.

This is a world uh class city um with its uh similar density to many of the uh world-class cities
that you're thinking about right now. Um in the next slide, you can see that it starts to take over
and spread. As the toxic plume spread across Tehran, sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide combined
with moisture in the air, producing dangerous acid rain. It oiled rained on them. Uh authorities
warned residents to stay indoors as dense pollution and falling rain carried corrosive chemicals
across the city. Um one more slide will show um the impact on the human. Um the toxic particles are
inhaled. Inhaling acidic particles can irritate the airways, aggravate asthma and bronchitis, and
allow uh fine particles to reach the bloodstream where they can increase cardiovascular stress. I
think that's all obvious. You don't want to be uh breathing oil smoke and being rained on by oil
rain. And that is the kind of crimes

that Israel just normalizes uh in their in their war fighting. And I I like to just start with that
so we understand um the human toll of what's going on in this battle. Let's take a look at the
Iranians for their part. Um these are their missiles and drones that they're using. Of course the
Shahed 136 is the primary tool. 2500 km range um allows it to target anything in the region from the
coast of Israel um all the way to uh the short haul uh right across the strait where a lot of the
Gulf uh bases uh are set up. The Imad um ballistic missile there. We've seen them used basically
every day. The Fattah is a hypersonic that has a uh maneuverable reentry vehicle. It's a significant
weapon that we have also seen nearly in every um wave. The way that the IRGC has fought this battle
is um the field reports are

done in waves. Wave 42 was today. Uh and the Khorramshahr 4. That is um uh their newest missile, and
it has a um submunitions capacity. So that warhead breaks apart um and distributes smaller warheads
that are harder to intercept. We will see that um coming up. The IRGC has fired upwards of 3,000
drones at this point and 600 ballistic missiles, almost 600 ballistic missiles. Also some cruise
missiles in that 600 number. And they are saying 40% are targeting Israel and 60% versus US bases.
They've targeted 17 vessels uh out in the sea. CENTCOM for its part, the United States says they've
carried out more than 6,000 air strikes, and the Israelis say 7,500 bombs have been dropped. But the
Iranians are continuing to fire um undeterred by this. Uh we can see on the next slide the rest of
their arsenal because interestingly, with all these think tanks getting their uh multi-million-
dollar uh endowments not

and following Iran like this, this is the Center for the International Center for Strategic and
International Studies, and they don't have a graphic that includes all of the missiles that Iran is
firing. So I had to pull together multiple graphics. Um which should tell you something about these
um these organizations that have been pro-sanction, pro-war on Iran for decades, um and still don't
even aren't even capable of logging correctly the number of missiles and the missile capabilities on
a single slide. So um I used multiple here. So um again, here you're seeing the Sejil. This is their
newest um one. We haven't seen that used. It's most advanced. The Imad, like I said, being used all
the time. The Ghadr all the time as well. And the Shahab 3 you'll see uh launched in uh upcoming uh,
slides. This is 11, so 12 has audio in it. Oh, this is 11. Okay. So, this is

the Khorramshahr. Um, this is the um, ballistic missile that launches 80 sub-munitions out of the
warhead and we'll see footage of that, um, coming up. Our next slide here has audio in it, so be
prepared for that. So, we're going to see all of their weapons launched in this series of launches.
And just to give you a sense of how the field reports are done. Um, for example, the 34th wave uh,
earlier this week the IRGC said uh, IRGC said the firing of a targeted system of powerful and
strategic Qader, Emad, and Fateh missiles um, and the Kheibar hypersonic missile in the 34th wave of
Operation True Promise 4 has entered the battlefield with the American and Zionist aggressors into a
new phase. Um, the gathering place of American soldiers at two bases in Al Dhafra uh, and Al Jaber,
that's in the UAE and Bahrain were effectively targeted by the firing of the IRGC

aerospace missiles and the vanguard attack of drones. Um, and they wrapped they said what they were
targeting Ramat David uh, David airbase um, in northern Israel, Haifa's naval base um, and
installations around Tel Aviv including the hidden missile launchers in front of Tel Aviv. Um, and
at the end they say Iran's target bank for attacking American and Zionist regime military and
infrastructure resources in the region is 10 times the targets available um, to the incapable
enemies. Security and stability in the region is either for everyone or it's for no one. So, that
was their report from um, uh, from the 34th wave. Uh, we are now at 42nd wave today um, and these
attacks are coming steady. One thing that the Israelis say um, the Americans do, they're constantly
saying that the rocket fire uh, missile fire is down x number of percentages to try to make it sound
like Iran cannot fire um, the

missiles. But, what they're comparing it to is on the first day when they fired 300 missiles um, and
that was just the opening day salvo. This is how they've handled the war since then, roughly 20 um,
ballistic missiles a day along with hundreds of drones. Um, and that has been um, the way they fire.
Israel has said this week that 800 missiles and drones as of Tuesday have been fired at them from
Iran. They said the IDF said that about half of the roughly 300 ballistic missiles Iran has launched
um, into Israel so far have been of the sub-munition warhead. Um, yeah, and two people were killed
in Israel this week. Um, and you can see in these launches that they're they're some double
launches. They're also using operational security that we saw all over Gaza, the way they and
Hezbollah, the way like you see here. They're blurring um, the mountain range that they're

firing out, but you can see that they're firing from different areas because we previously hadn't
seen um, those mountains. We hadn't seen those flat areas in the same way, so they're clearly firing
from all over the country. It's a massive uh, country. Um, the next slide that we will see is the
arrival of one of these sub-munitions. Oh my god. Holy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] So, you can see there the
way that they um, they de- the sub-munitions come out. Um, these are the ones from the Khorramshahr
that are 80 um, but there's also uh, refitted warheads on the on the Qader which is 15 to 20 of
those. Um, and the next slide uh, as well is the arrival of um, a sub-munition of the Khorramshahr.
And you can see by this these these are single missiles. Israel is trying to get these called
cluster bombs. They want them to be associated with cluster munitions that the

international community has outlawed. Um, I'll get a um, a bit more into that after we see this next
one cuz they're clearly not uh, cluster bombs. That's a single strike uh, of a sub-munition that
could be shot out of the air by any of Israel's four air defense systems if they worked. Um, we'll
explain in a bit why they're not working as well uh, also. Um, so 15, yeah. As you can see this is
from a traffic camera landing in the middle of a an open street there. Also no sirens uh, on those
last two ones which I think are notable. Israelis certainly thought they were notable. Um, and you
can see in the next slide you can see the um, the depth of the impact and the car flipped over
there. We're looking at two Israeli soldiers with their faces blurred because they're criminals and
they all know it and their army knows it

and they don't put any pictures of them up now. Usually they turn their heads which is what they're
doing here. We're looking at the side of their face and the other guy has his back turned. That's
how we see even Israeli graduations these days um, because they have a feeling that justice may
catch up to them for this war for them that is now 880 days uh, into their genocidal rampage. Um,
the next slide you'll see is what the sub-munition looks like. Um, that's roughly the size uh,
several kilos of explosives in each one uh, [snorts] and they're in the nose cone of the re-entry
vehicle um, and they break apart as we saw in those previous videos. But, what Israel is trying to
do is call them bombs which are a horrendous weapon that puts miniature bomblets. The bomb breaks
open and it showers a small area with hundreds if not thousands of small

bombs. Um, and this is something that Israel did famously, infamously um, at the end of the July 20
2006 war in Lebanon. When they had realized that they had lost the war, they sued for peace and then
they fired uh, in the last days cluster bombs. Let's go to the next slide cuz this is a a slide from
uh, Haaretz newspaper in Israel that says IDF commander we fired more than a million cluster bombs
in Lebanon. The subtitle says phosphorus and cluster bombs heavily used unexploded munitions litter
a wide area of Lebanon. And I was in Lebanon at that time and it it they were everywhere. They were
hanging from trees, they were in people's houses, they were in the gardens and the shrubbery so you
couldn't see them. They're just small and uh, they're deadly. This is what the article said um,
quoting uh, the head of the IDF rocket unit. What we did

was insane and monstrous. We covered entire towns in cluster commander the rocket unit head start
stated that the IDF fired 1,800 cluster bombs containing over 1.2 million cluster bomblets. In
addition, soldiers in the IDF artillery units testified that their army used phosphorus shells
during the war forbidden under international law and that the rocket multiple launch rocket systems
were highly inaccurate. So, these are cluster bombs. They're all in one area and they're intended to
kill civilians. The sub-munitions that is coming out of a ballistic missile has spreads them out
over multiple kilometer range. Um, all it is doing is making a single missile into um, a dozen or
dozens of uh, missiles to be intercepted. And that those interceptions are supposed to happen by
Israel's layered multi-billion dollar hundreds of billions of dollars air defense system uh, and
it's not. And they're trying to call them cluster munitions um, because that's what Israel does.
Projects the

things that they do criminally and hope that they can make it stick onto somebody else. Um, let's
take a look at the next one. We're going to watch the launch of Shahed drones here. So, this is some
of the 3,000 drones that have been launched so far. They can take off from there. You can see they
don't need a they don't need to be truck-mounted, although we have seen truck-mounted with racks
that can send out a dozen at a time, but you can also send these from the desert um and fire them
off um relatively safely in comparison to uh other munitions. So this this type of weapon is um is
not going to run out um and it's been very, very effective and you're looking at um the Navy's uh
drones there. So if we look at the next slide, we also have audio in this for the launch of um
drones and cruise

missiles. This is number 18 we're at now. That's the Pa- That's the Pava cruise missile that you can
see and we're going to see later in the show that the Iraqi resistance is using that uh same type of
drone. We also saw the Hadid 110 for the first time. It's a small turbo engine um with uh 350 km max
that carries a 30 kilo payload and we've seen these be used by the Iranian Navy on targets um in the
Gulf that are close to them. We also have audio in on this next one for launches. Um These are
launched by the Iranian army um which is also in the battle along with the um Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps. So this is number 19 with audio. So you could see those launches again. The White House
press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre said this week that she confirmed a report by Reuters that said
as many as 150

troops have been injured since military operations began a week ago saying that number of injured is
in the ballpark of 150, something that had been covered up up until now. Pentagon spokesman Shawn
Parnell told the Associated Press that eight US soldiers have been severely injured noting that the
majority of the injuries have been minor um with uh some returning to duty. Seven US service members
have been acknowledged to have died so far, six of whom were killed in Kuwait and another in Saudi
Arabia. Um Let's take a look at number 19B here. We're going to uh see the targeting of the Kuwaiti
base with a drone from the Kuwaiti base. Oh [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] And the American soldier there. >> god.
This is in Camp Buehring. Um and an interesting side note, it's named after the one of the highest-
ranking officers that was killed in the Iraq war and he was killed in 2003 in the Al-Rasheed

Hotel in Baghdad and he was killed in an assassinate assassination attempt on Paul Wolfowitz who was
the uh biggest pusher and architect of the Iraq war. Um Wolfowitz survived, but uh Buehring didn't
and they renamed this base um after him and the base is a miniature city. As people may know um
these bases essentially become American cities. Um I watched a report on this particular base last
night and they were in subway, they were in an arcade, they have uh you know, basketball courts and
gyms, they have full bus system um residence quarters. They're they're sprawling miniature sovereign
US territory. And so the reason why these are being targeted um they've been known in this region
for a long time and it speaks to um to the longevity of this um war in Iraq, war in the region,
global war on terror that normalized these bases um that are now being destroyed to such a

level that rebuilding them um I I think rebuilding them could come into question. The destruction
level um is such they're also largely abandoned. So their utility in this key moment is uh
drastically uh reduced. Let's take a look at number 21. This is an IRGC drone versus a US hotel in
Bahrain. And the IRGC said on this the flight of the cowardly American soldiers from regional bases,
they're taking refuge in hotels and host countries and their criminal US Army's use of civilian
facilities in the Persian Gulf countries as cover do not escape the intelligence monitoring of the
IRGC. The brave soldiers of the IRGC are laying in wait to hunt the soldiers of the aggressor
American Army and will not let them go. And just on a side note the number of locals killed in these
operations are very low. In the UAE in the total in the 13 days, there's been four people killed.

They were migrant workers um who presumably didn't have the rights to leave the job sites in the way
that um the locals do. There's two in Kuwait, both migrant workers two in Saudi, also migrant
workers, and one in Bahrain. So when you're talking about the scale of destruction and death that
Israel and the US rains down, more than a thousand in um Iran already, 600 in Lebanon, and of course
100,000 in Gaza at least um it's just worth noting um uh those numbers. Also, Bahrain arrested the
people that took that video. Um they have arrested uh a number of people. The numbers are not
entirely clear, but there was a report yesterday of six people being arrested, migrant workers that
fit that quote filmed, published, and reposted videos related to the effects of Iranian aggression.
And again, linking back to what Ali was saying about uh the Bahraini minister this base uh the US
Fifth

Fleet base is not so much a mountain of fire as he called it as it has not been able to do anything
to defend uh Bahrain from what we are seeing. Um Number 21B here, we're going to see the uh an
attack on the Dubai airport. You're going to see a drone come in from the right here and um it's
going to hit just outside of the terminal and you can see it just misses a radar dome. It looks like
that radar dome might have been the target. Um but this strike on uh the Dubai airport is part of
process of shutting down 14,000 flights in the region. Um Emirates Airline is the world's largest
long-haul airline and by far the largest airline in the Middle East and they are not flying there.
You see a close-up of uh the Shahed strike there on the Dubai airport. Um Next up, we're going to
see uh

the integrated air defense system of the IRGC and the Artesh, the um Iranian army um knocking these
um drones, US and Israeli drones out of the sky. Um We don't have an exact number on this, but we've
seen at least dozens of these knocked out of the sky. At one point, the IRGC uh said that they had
hit 80. Um it's um somewhere between dozens and that at least because we've we've shown you now a
dozen just on this program alone and I don't pick all of them. Also, next one is uh part of our
weekly coverage of of uh local farmers with um uh with expensive American drones. There's this local
farmer in Lorestan driving his Hermes 900 drone around town. Um So that is the drone work that has
been done. But this week the targeting um really came to light on what on these bases are being hit.
Um if we take

a look at number 24, we're talking about the THAAD radar essentially eradication from the region. Um
this is a graphic from the Financial Times that shows you um we're looking at the top radar at the
top is a half a billion-dollar radar. Um it's an advanced warning radar uh upon which all the system
um not just the THAAD system, but this we're talking about the THAAD system here, the US's uh
terminal high altitude area defense system that tries to intercept before they um come before the
missiles come back down into the atmosphere. They're exoatmospheric. Um And they use the radars from
the uh THAAD system is connected into all the air defense uh systems and it's a very powerful one
and that's the efficacy of the system is how powerful your radar is, how sharp you're able to uh
pick up the trajectory, the launch site, and calibrate all your air defense systems on the

way in. So when you knock these out, you know, some people say it's the heart or the eyes of the
system of this uh multi-billion-dollar system. It's a three-billion-dollar system over the course of
its lifetime. Those single radar um that got knocked out is at least half a million and each of
these systems um each of these THAAD systems, this considered one THAAD system that you're looking
at and it can have six to eight um truck-launched interceptor launchers, each one with eight. So six
trucks by eight is 48 launchers. Um That's what they have before they have to reload and that's a
$700 million outlay. And we know that last year they only made 96 total interceptors for the Patriot
system. So, the system itself and the interceptors is one part, but the radar itself is part of the
radar for the entire system that is used by the US and Israel. We can look

at the next slides. We can see the proof of that here. This is the radar. It's massive, you know,
it's larger than a um than the trailer uh of an 18-wheeler. It's a significant radar that has um
significantly higher, like algorithmic algorithmically higher uh capacity than the smaller radars
that it passes off to. And what it does is it takes the initial reading, and then it's so large and
accurate and sharp, it's able to tell the smaller radars who are don't have that capability, it can
tell them where it's coming, and that allows the smaller radars to then be more effective. So, you
take out the large radar, now your small radars are not effective. Um and this is a a problem that
for the US and Israel that will compound itself. And replacing them in battle um is a long shot,
although they're talking about taking the Patriot system out of South Korea. So,

sorry about that, South Korea, I guess, for the Americans. Promised to protect you, but actually
we're just going to move your air defense system cuz we uh are getting ours all blown up. Um and
these are hit in These have been hit in um concerted effort in radar communications and air defense
systems in Qatar, UAE, Jordan, Bahrain, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia. Um we take a look at the next
slide. Um you can see here the damage on uh Muwaffaq al-Salti. This is the base in Jordan. You can
see the That's the massive um radar that you can see uh destroyed there. We're looking at a
satellite image that is boxed that shows the damaged structures. Um Satellite photos, according to
CNN, satellite photos show a Raytheon AN/TPY-2 radar um and support equipment used by the US Patriot
missile defense system was destroyed in Muwaffaq al-Salti airbase in Jordan in the opening days of
the war.

Um and I reported on this in the build-up to the war because Muwaffaq al-Salti base um was being
used for um more fighter jets than we had seen. There was at least 60 additional ones on top of the
US expeditionary wing. The radar system for the Patriot um and the transporter radar, manufactured
by Raytheon, according to the 2025 missile defense agency budget, costs half a billion dollars, as I
have said. We'll look another one. Um are we on 26 here? This is another one showing um the base
from a little further up. Um but you can see again, clearly see the damage. It's out in the open in
the desert, and you don't see missed strikes all around it. It looks like the precision of these uh
weapons um are not aerial weapons. They're not missing by uh you know, missing by 20 or 30 ft.
You're seeing direct on hits. Uh this image shows

a pair of 13-ft craters in the sand near the radar system, suggesting that it may have taken
multiple attempts to hit the system, which is split across 40, sorry, five 40-ft trailers. According
to the CNN report, all appeared to be destroyed or seriously damaged. So, they're picking them off
one by one. Um they can do that with their uh with their drones. The US has a really difficult time
finding the drones uh in themselves, and they're using those drones to knock out the ballistic
missile defense systems in these uh countries. Number 27 here, now we're going to look at the UAE.
Again, you get the same site, uh a before and after of the system being destroyed in the UAE. At
least three buildings at the military installation in Ruways and four at an installation in Sadar,
uh both in the UAE, were damaged between February 28th and March 1st, according to CNN. Pull-through
vehicle

sheds used to store store radar systems and Patriot batteries at the sites were among those
destroyed. And the next one you'll see again, um um you'll see the destruction um the before and
after destruction of this second one in um the UAE. Um and the Iranians said on day nine, the
spokesperson for the IRGC said that uh the highly advanced radars of the Patriot system, which have
an extremely long range and have been have been destroyed uh during operations to suppress the
enemy's anti-missile defense in the region, four highly advanced US Patriot system radars were
targeted and destroyed. The highly advanced long-range Patriot radars located in al-Udeid, al-Ruways
in the UAE, and al-Kharj in Saudi Arabia, and al-Azraq, that's Muwaffaq al-Salti in Jordan, were
targeted and destroyed in a 24-hour period of time. Let's skip to number 31 here, um [snorts] cuz
this is the uh early warning radar in Qatar. And this is a

critical piece of uh of all of the air defense. This is the most powerful radar, um and it's the
radar upon which all the other radars rely. And we can see here that it has been uh totally
destroyed as well. So, very significant for a long battle of attrition that the air defense systems
are already struggling to a significant degree based on precision targeting by the Iranian military.
So, that is the coverage of uh the Iran front and the Gulf front. We're going to move now to
Lebanon, uh where there have been now 10 days of war since this new uh battle broke out. You can see
Israeli evacuation notices um as we reported earlier, and we had an excellent interview with Ruqaiya
Ruqaiya uh Shamseddine that people should definitely check out. She was reporting on the ground on
these issues. Evacuation of 760,000 Lebanese um on the move with basically no warning. Uh a

only 123 of whom are in school and government shelters at this point. Um the Israeli military says
they've uh dropped thousand bombs and 700 strikes in the first week, and they've killed um 600,
wounded 1,400 others um as we know from the earlier reports on this show. Um so, that is the map of
uh Lebanon that you're looking at there. The next slide is Hezbollah's response. Hezbollah said uh
uh we are warning the residents of the northern settlements, essentially doing what the Israelis do.
You are required to evacuate all settlements located within 5 km of the borderline. The aggression
of your army against the Lebanese sovereignty and civilians and the destruction of civilian infra-
infrastructure and the campaign of displacement it is carrying out will not go unanswered. Head
south. And Hezbollah field reports um have been ending with this line. The Islamic resistance is
committed to defending its land and people, especially with the

Israeli enemy exceeding boundaries with its crimes. It is Its response targeted military sites. The
Islamic resistance Its response targeted military sites, unlike the enemy's targeting of civilians.
And this is the minimum duty to curb it and prevent it from persisting in its dangerous objectives
against Lebanon, its state, its people, and its resistance. Hezbollah has fired over a thousand
rockets since uh they joined the war 10 days ago. Um let's take a look at this first operation. This
is an anti-tank guided missile strike um a long-distance strike uh presumably with an Almas, uh
which is a reverse-engineered anti-tank uh guided missile system that uh Hezbollah captured during
the 2006 July War. You can see that they This is one of the Israeli positions. After the war, Israel
set up five advanced positions inside uh Lebanese territory. Um and this is one of those five
positions, and you can see um no matter how much earth moving

the Israelis do, their Israeli the Israeli soldiers always get up on top of that earth mound that is
supposed to protect them, uh and stand around and uh is what they're doing. In this case, the IDF
reported at least five casualties from multiple anti-tank guided missile strikes on uh this base in
that single day. Uh this is from 3 days ago. Um and like I said, it's one of five forward bases
inside of uh Lebanon. And um the Israeli army reported that two soldiers were moderately wounded in
a Hezbollah missile attack on a military post in South Lebanon on Friday afternoon. Um several anti-
tank missiles were fired in the attack, and three others were wounded later uh in strikes. So, um
also in a separate operation uh a couple of days ago at 3:00 a.m. near the IDF outpost in uh
Margaliot and Manara. So, these are the positions set up inside Lebanon. Um They

force uh the the engineering vehicle the Puma engineering vehicle, the 601st battalion, got struck.
The company commander went in with a recovery bulldozer to tow the vehicle out uh accompanied by two
D9 armored bulldozers. During the towing attempt, an anti-tank uh or explosive projectile hit one of
the D9s, and two soldiers were killed on the spot. Another officer was uh injured in that as well.
Um now, let's take a look at the rocket attacks. We're at 35 now here. Um This uh rocket attacks on
Kiryat Shmona, which is in the top of the Galilee panhandle. You can see the Hezbollah crest there.
Uh, and the supreme leader Ali Khamenei there beside him being saluted on the front lines in these
very dangerous launches of rockets with uh you know, Israeli um Israeli fighter aircraft,
helicopters, and drones in the air. Didn't get the video on the show today, but there's one released
by Hezbollah today

where you can see them setting the rockets with that over uh watch by the Israelis. Um, let let's
take a look at the incoming. Oh, okay. Sorry, there's a couple more. Um, you can see the fighter in
the dark there um moving away to safety after this launch. And these um these count as one
operation, too, right? So, I'm going to tell you how many uh Hezbollah operations there has been,
almost 200. Um, but that's just number of individual operations. That doesn't tell you how many
weapons were fired um cuz as we see here, there's our multiple launches um um in each time. And
again with these Hezbollah videos, they give us the map of exactly what they are targeting. Um, and
you can see this is a multiple rocket launcher, at least uh 14-barrel rocket launcher that's going
to be fired at Kiryat Shmona here when the fighters get the launch uh coordinations typed

into this launcher. They can set it for a timer, and then they can get out of the area for um
counterfire. Which is what you're uh seeing the fighters do when they're setting those uh launch
boxes. Um, and these are significant launches. Um, these are heavier um so far they've been firing a
lot of heavier um weaponry, 302-mm meter um missile mi- rockets, and they have um this is the Iron
Dome system that you're watching at now coming and attempting to intercept. You saw one just there
fire into the community from a misfire. Um, let's look at 36 cuz you can hear that with the sound in
And you can see that's a pretty good shot of how the misfire ended up in the community. Um, 37 we
also see uh incoming rockets here. And you can see the aerial battle. We're watching the streaks
across the sky. That was uh that is This is

the Iron Dome versus Hezbollah rockets. And you can see um the Hezbollah rockets have the high
ground advantage firing down, and the missiles are attempting to intercept. And you can just watch
that for yourself and see that the interception rate is low. And with these radars out, it is uh a
strong supposition that the Iron Dome used those radars because of how powerful they were um to help
to assist their systems. Um, let's look at number 38 cuz we have uh the launch of Hezbollah drones
here, which they have also been using as multi-lay- multi-layered attacks. The drones are um
composite, so they um have a smaller radar cross-section. And you can see the Israelis have been
having a terrible time with this, as have the Americans. Uh and the reason why the Americans made a
clone of the Iranian uh missile um sorry, Iranian drone because of how effective they are. Um, and
so

the Israelis have not been able to get these um to get many of these drones despite the fact they
have helicopters constantly hunting for these um across the desert in the south and also in the
north. And you're going to see here the soldiers um see it coming over and they open fire on it. We
can see in the next slide that uh I called life after Thad. Uh this is them This is the uh rifle air
defense system. It's not going to hold up too well if that is the long-term plan. And of course, uh
you might ask if they're firing into their neighborhoods like that to try to shoot down the drones,
is there a problem? Yes, there is. The IDF said this week several homes in northern Israel were
damaged by helicopter fire during attempts to shoot down Hezbollah drones this morning. Um, the
helicopter used 30-mm cannons to shoot down the

drone over uh the Lebanon border. So, those are the pop bottle size um rounds from the Apaches that
you don't want falling in your community. And they are because they're failing to detect these in
time. Um, let's take a look at number 40 here. These are Fadi sixes. These are heavy uh extended-
range rockets that um that Hezbollah has um that carry a heavy warhead, 150-kilo warhead. And here
they're aiming and showing you that they're aiming at Israel Aerospace Industries, which is the
manufacturer of It's the national manufacturer along with Rafael. Um But you can see the truck
launch there, and the operational security is not even letting us see uh the whole truck because
they don't want to see to show where this is being launched from. But you can see the vertical truck
launch uh happening there. This was among uh at this point uh as of Tuesday, they had Hezbollah had
carried out

65 separate operations. Um Israel Aerospace Industries manufactures everything from unmanned D9
bulldozers that we watched destroy Gaza um along with the missile defense system. So, they're using
their uh rocket and missile capacity to target the those systems. And we'll see the next one. These
are high-quality operations. Uh Hezbollah ability to pinpoint and target the Rafael uh military
manufacturer here with a rocket barrage. Um The uh Rafael is the manufacturer of the Iron Dome. So,
we have rockets uh being fired at the Iron Dome maker. So, uh a lot of significance, but also
military advantage to doing this for the same reason the Americans are doing it. Um, you target
these systems um and attempt to do a blinding operation is is essentially what it is. And we saw
this on the first days of October over 7th um when the the successful uh attack on uh IDF bases was
made possible by blinding uh those

bases to what they think that they can count on uh to protect them. Like um the Gulf states believe
that this missile defense system, which is not um having its best showing here in one of its first,
if not its first ever active combat. Um, these missile defense systems have been sold to the
American public um you know, since Reagan, since Star Wars um to to try to shoot down uh missiles.
So, you're talking about hundreds of billions of dollar program that we're seeing in uh in its final
uh in in its peak iteration. And one more, we can see uh Nasser rockets. These are uh 302-mm uh
rockets that are have attached to them. Hezbollah has retrofitted them with a guidance system, so
these become guided missiles. Um, and they're Hezbollah-built, and they are going to target here um
the naval airbase uh the naval base in Haifa. And the naval base in Haifa

has uh a lot of radars for maritime tracking, but also it does dual function of tracking the
northern border. So, um they are uh targeting these installations, these radars for the same
purposes. And this is a significant number of operations in the early days for Hezbollah. They are
carrying out um th- uh average of about 25 operations a day um from a group that uh if you listen to
western media or Israeli military um uh or Israeli politicians, that this group was destroyed and
degraded and then couldn't fight back. And they joined this war um showing the exact opposite. Of
course, on this program people who are followers of this program know that we did not do that to
Hezbollah. On the the war ended in Lebanon. The Lebanon front ended um with Hezbollah ground forces
repelling an invasion by the Israeli military that numbered uh in the tens of thousands of soldiers
along the

border, and they couldn't uh infiltrate into Lebanon to the areas that they wanted to because
Hezbollah was a considerable fighting force that repelled them. Um, it's not me surprising that
Hezbollah is able to mount this kind of resistance um because you were sold a bill of goods on their
status uh before. Um, one more, 43 here. We're going to see again these guided Nasser series
rockets. There's two type missiles. They're missiles because they are they have guidance systems. Um
and you're going to see them target here um a key satellite installation in central Israel that used
to be a national satellite in uh installation, but was privatized. Um, but it is the key download
link from uh from from space of satellite communications, television communications, radio
communications. And it's a um a satellite station and a satellite farm. So, again, targeting um and
targeting it effectively as we're going to see uh coming up in

this video cuz Hezbollah has attached this video of dashcam footage we're watching and there you see
the strike uh, on the right-hand side there. So, um, dashcam footage that was released by the
Israelis uh, immediately shows up in Hezbollah's video to prove that they hit these targets which,
by the way, Israel denied happened, which they do every time and that is what working right now in
this uh, den of lies that we are living in uh, is always challenging. So, uh, 44, there's just one
more. Was that him walking around? Did we see him walking around? He's going to walk Israeli soldier
here walking around. You can see all of the a number of the satellites destroyed. You can see um,
the main transmitter there also destroyed um, at the satellite farm. So, successful hits by
Hezbollah. And just to give you a sense, Hezbollah in the first week carried out 153 operations. So,
in

the first 7 days, 153 operations, uh, 96 uh, into Israel, 57 into Israeli positions inside Lebanon.
The targeting distance was 160 km. So, they've already moved to the highest level um, of depth of
targeting as they were when the war left off. They're not re-entering um, the escalation ladder.
They've targeted 36 military bases in those 153 attacks. Um, they've downed three drones and they've
used 90 missiles, nine artillery 90 missile ops, 99 artillery ops, um, 29 drones. Um, enemy losses
they suspect 19 military vehicles, um, 74 fortifications and defensive positions, which is what
those berms that we saw them getting hit on are and that is just one week uh, of operations from
Hezbollah. So, that is the Lebanon front and I want to show you a little bit from Iraq um, before we
wrap up here. Um, this is the uh, Islamic Resistance in Iraq targeting US bases. This is their own
compilation. They

put these videos out every day, multiple times a day. Um, but this is a compilation of their
attacks. They are targeting the Operation Inherent Resolve base command headquarters in Erbil. Um,
they're talking they're hitting facilities all over Iraq. Um, the Inherent Resolve command in Erbil
is hit daily. Um, but there's of course American positions all over Iraq that are being hit. Um, the
American presence headquarters at Baghdad Airport is being hit uh, housing soldiers the housing
units of soldiers on the occupation base in Erbil have been hit. There you can see some of the
aftermath of that. Um, and these are with uh, largely with drones, although we're going to see on
the next slide a um, a cruise missile launched. This is the Jamal 10. This is its debut flight. It's
based on the Pava IRGC cruise missile that we saw launched earlier and particularly the missile that
we cruise missile we saw during

Operation True Promise 1 and 2 when they sent the waves of drones ahead of time. Um, and the cruise
missile. So, the drones go slow, cruise missiles go go faster. Missiles go uh, on an arcing
ballistic trajectory and so when you send the three of them, it sends a multi-layered um, attack and
for the uh, Iraqi resistance here, I mark them down every day. They're at 291 operations. They're
averaging almost 30 a day uh, against the American positions in um, in Iraq and those um, the Pava,
the Jamal 10 that you saw, that cruise missile, that can target Israel and they said they did target
Israel with that. And with this one last slide, just want to show you how the Americans are doing
here. The Pentagon has burned through 5.6 billion dollars worth of ammunition during the first two
days of its military assault on Iran, according to three US officials, a figure underscores

the deepening alarm among some on Capitol Hill. 5.6 billion in two days to basically watch their uh,
entire military architecture in the Middle East be destroyed. So, that is the resistance report for
day 888 of Israel's genocide.
