Title: FPV drones stalk Israeli invaders, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-05-07
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypkm9Lpb360
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: core weekly / user supplied

All right, you are watching and listening to the electronic inifatada. I am John Elmer. This is the
resistance report on day 944 of Israel's genocide in Gazas, day 69 of Israel and the US's war on
Iran, and day 66 of Hezbollah's defense of South Lebanon. I'll be covering Lebanon today, but first
a word on the Iran war and the Strait of Hormuz. Let's take a look at this first map. The IRGC Navy
put out a map this week um that showed an expanding blockade. We're looking at a map here of the
Straight of Hormuz uh zoomed in um and the blockade has extended just uh right up to uh the UAE's
number one export port uh oil exporting port and uh on the other side the entrance to the straight
of Hormuse. So that's become now a closed military zone. everything that's in between those red
lines. And of course, the US has added their

blockade. Uh on top of that, Tyrron is still running um their traffic separation scheme that runs in
the red that you could see up towards the north along the Iranian closer to the Iranian coast. and
the US this week on Sunday uh Trump in his market manipulation uh weekly market manipula market
manipulation uh launched what uh he said was called uh project freedom and [snorts] he suggested in
his message that uh the US would be escorting ships there's more than a thousand ships caught in the
Persian Gulf um and h aren't able to leave um and the idea was floated that they would be escorted
there. That didn't happen. It happened to two ships. Apparently, two uh American ships, American
flag ships uh were taken were sailed out of the straight of Hormuz. Everything that is related to
the American blockade is um it presumes that no one's sailing back in to the Gulf. So,

the these are long-term uh global economy destroying um blockades that the Americans seem to not
understand the consequences of um on global markets. And all of these plans just stretch this uh
this period of uncertainty out. And I'll remind you what I said uh on the first shows about this
war. every day that the straight is closed, um it takes at least a week to uh to fix that day, and
it gets worse the longer it goes. So, we're now 69 days. So, we're talking like we're starting to
push into 3 months to just to uh to correct the mistakes um or sorry, a year and uh a quarter to fix
the mistakes. um in and so this is a long-term problem that is not going to be fixed by um US
escorts. If we look at the next map, escorts, not even uh what the Americans have in mind, the term
is convoy in

naval uh affairs um that they would convoy ships in and out of the strait. The project freedom
lasted for 36 hours and Trump cancelled it. Um, but the logistics, I've talked about this a couple
of times on this show, the logistics of escorting uh ships through the straight, that in itself,
were it to even be possible if Iran were to say, "We're not even going to fire on those escorts,
which they did fire on the first one that happened, um, the the escort would take to get a thousand
ships out of the Gulf would take months. Um and the global economy is uh on a clock and the
Americans believe that Iran is on a clock and uh I think that we can look and see that the
resilience uh of Iran is going to outpace that of the global economy and particularly the Gulf
States economy which you can see on this map here

from the New York Times. the UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, uh Kuwait, major oil terminals in Saudi as well,
major oil terminals all through the Persian Gulf are effectively shut down. This was the first month
that uh Kuwait didn't export one barrel of oil for the first time in 30 years. Um and a lot of the
oil installations themselves have to be shut down. Um they have to be refired up to um to get back
up to pace. So, we're looking at a multi-year um um tale on this uh on this story of the Strait of
Hormuz. In any case, Trump's escorts were not escorts. He was setting up a hotline, a coordination
cell where uh commercial shippers could radio to the US to ask what the best route was um to get
out. And the uh American regime uh painted it as a red, white, and blue dome. So, it wasn't a ship
escort. It's not

a guided missile destroyer escort. And if you look at the coastline of this map here, um you can see
why um if Iran chose to attack those ships and the reason why there hasn't been US warships
transiting the strait um over the past 70 days, um they have all of the advantages, the geographic
advantages, high terrain, um missiles embedded all along the coast, the entire Persian Gulf's uh
northern shore is Iran. Um, and so they really do have every uh benefit and uh the Americans have
none. Um, it did nothing to calm uh shippers who are and mariners. There's some 20,000 mariners who
are stuck in the Persian Gulf. Um, this hotline that Trump set up that died 36 hours later wasn't
going to do it. Um, but the American regime did say that the operation epic fury is over. Um, we're
not sure if all aspects of the regime are talking off the same

page. That was Marco Rubio yesterday and he was uh or on Tuesday and um yeah, it's not clear how
much connection he has, but he said the war is over. He said this part of the war uh is over. This
blockade is a new uh project and then that new project lasted 36 hours. So, let's look at the next
map and just remind people what the geography looks like. This is what Iran looks like for ships
going through the straight of Hormuz. We're looking at a map that shows um the geoysical um the
physical geography of Iran um with just has overwatch over the entire Persian Gulf. It has that
rocky shoreline where they can dispense ships, small fast boats from like Boston Wher type uh boats
that have that are armed um that can swarm ships. They can fire um anti-ship cruise missiles from um
from those shorelines. They can fire anti-ship ballistic missiles.

And they fire them so close to the ships that the ability of those ships to defend themselves are um
they're thin. And that is the reason why we haven't seen if Trump wanted to declare victory, he
would have steamed his ships through um the straight and shown that the straight was open and then
said the war was over and we won. but there's no way that he can say we won um in this current
situation. So, it's just a stalemate. It's an unsustainable stalemate. The blockades porous. Iran is
getting ships out. Um the Americans are not and the Gulf States by and large are not. So, um if it's
a stalemate, but it it strongly favors Iran in this situation, and we'll see how long uh this lasts
in this part of the war. But let's take a look at Lebanon. Now, we'll focus today on Lebanon. Going
to focus on three key areas just

north of Nura on the coast there that you see in the bottom left of the map. Um, Rasal Baya is the
area that the Israelis have set up a forward base. Uh, north of Nakura, south of Seur or Ty there on
the uh western coast. The Latani River is of course where Israel said that they were going to
conquer all the territory uh below it, but they're not even close. Um they're only within a few
kilometers of the border. Uh Bintage Bale there in the central uh area. That is where there's been a
lot of fighting and we're going to watch a lot of video from there because there's a lot of American
troop, a lot of Israeli troops there. Um still six divisions um deployed here in the battle in
Lebanon. No ceasefire. Both sides are saying there's no ceasefire right now. Um so Bintage Bale will
see a lot of operations there. And

then if you follow up the uh the Galilee panhandle as it's called up to the northern tip of Israel
um and acing is in um to the west of that through the um the valleys and mountains um to the west uh
of the Galilee panhandle and um the famous valleys uh from the 2006 waruki that uh was where um the
marava um the graveyard of the marava was when they attempted to invade through that path. That's
where the fighting is happening there. So, those three places we'll keep an eye on on this show.
There was more than 150 civilians killed this week. Uh according to the Lebanese Ministry of Health
um and we've been watching that, of course, um consistently. Israel's war is on civilians. Their
goal is not to fight Hezbollah. Their goal is to destroy civilian homes in South Lebanon to make
there be nowhere to return to. This is the betanoon and

Rafa model from Gaza. Um, which was previously borrowed from the Daha doctrine from Lebanon, but uh
escalated dramatically uh in Gaza. Um, so on this first video that we're going to see, um, just keep
your eye peeled. You're going to watch a drone come from the right side of the screen to the left
side as it hits a tank. Number three here. And this was the first operation. There you see it strike
the tank. This was the first operation where we've seen two cameras. So, we have a drone uh
assessing battle damage assessments. Um, and you can see there the uh Markova tank got hit in the
turret. We'll see uh the drone here. This is moments uh earlier and now we're on board with the
drone. And you can see the tank is uh 12:00. Um and the drone with the PG7VL warhead comes in. And
you can see here both hatches are open.

The loader's hatch and the commander hatch uh are both open. So this uh RPG round goes directly into
the hatch and carry and that's where you see now we're seeing the um above shot. Um that's what
creates the cookoff. It it it lights up the ammo that's in um the loaders bay and in the turret and
in the storage areas beside it. Um, so this is a pretty significant uh visual. Um, but it's only
we're only seeing this because of the second camera. We don't see these burnoffs to say it's it's
not accurate to say this is the first tank we've seen burning. We've I've shown you multiple burning
tanks before on this show from thermal cameras, from uh anti-tank guided missile strikes. Um, but we
don't have the uh second camera on these and I wouldn't advise having multiple cameras uh on these
operations um overall because um they're more useful as attack um

than to show military media. Um but on an an significant operation here that cookoff um obviously
caught the Israelis attention and the uh the Hezbollah fighters obviously knew that that position
was weakened and that's why they put the second camera up so we could have a battle damage
assessment and we certainly got that from that video. Let's take a look at number four. um because
we've seen the real development week week I mean day by day we see the the advance of the piloting
of these of the targeting uh of these here we're flying over Canthra this is in uh up and towards
the north uh of the Galilee uh panhandle to the west of it you're seeing multiple targets seen on
this flight so you see uh a couple of tanks here directly going down onto into the tank and you're
going to see the gap between the turret and the hull of the

tank. That looks to be where this um RPG round is being aimed. And as we know from Gaza, that is one
of the places that you definitely want uh the fighters definitely want to be aiming for. Um and that
appears to be a direct hit on that. Uh Army Radio this week was had another panicked report about
operators realizing that Hezbollah drones were being deployed from more than 20 km deep. So even the
fiber optic drones being deployed for more than uh 20 kilometers um from the border and Israel is
attempting to set up a security zone that is a few kilometers um in some areas it's 5 km in some
areas it's only hundreds of meters um but they said this week that um on army radio that the uh the
defense is bound to be breached and responses to drones is currently lagging. a senior IDF official
told Army radio. So, um they

are still have no solution for these. Um as you see the direct hit here on the turret gap of this
Merkava tank. Um let's take a look at the next one. These are two shots of um artillery position
that was hit. That is a um an artillery bus essentially uh a humper of uh artillery rounds and um um
and um and it was hit and around it there was a number of vehicles that were hit as well that burned
up uh in this strike. This is in Chimera. This is just across the border from Bites Bale. Um, more
than at least 12 soldiers were wounded and Army radio said that several other soldiers suffered from
anxiety from this attack. They're pretty scared. Um, and they needed to have treatment from this
attack. Again, this is an intelligency position that is firing into South Lebanon. Uh, and the
reason why um people are dying at the

rate they are in Lebanon. So to pick this target >> [snorts] >> um just shows again one of the
assets of these drones is that you're getting constant aerial surveillance um which Hezbollah
already had excellent intelligence that we know um but these two uh shots uh show you um the precise
intelligence because that's put out this artillery uh unit uh this artillery position put out of
service for some time. Um, let's take a look at number seven cuz they're going after an artillery
position here, too. Now, we're moving over to the western coast. This is Rasel Biada, the Biada
Headland here. We've seen this shot many times because this uh Israeli forward base has been
targeted literally every single day um in this last period. And you're going to see this. We're
we're watching the flight here. And look down now. You'll see that's the Israeli military base. You
can see the tarp, um the

canvas roof over their tents there. Um you can see the excavators that built the anti-tank BMS that
are around there. Um and now you see it's locking in on its target. It passed on all of those
different um targets. Um and is heading in here to an artillery position that you're going to watch
be struck directly. Um and that's an M113. We saw these used as um truck bombs in Gaza. These are
old out of stock um armored personnel carriers. You can see it in the next slide. The still um the
way that the artillery position is set up. So this is the command position for the artillery uh
battery and Hzbollah hits it. So um smart to target choosing uh if that's the right word uh for the
Israelis. they call when um over the radio we saw journalists were in Baya uh on the day of this and
the journals heard on the

radio air hammer which is what the IDF uh alert for uh incoming drones are uh and they rushed the
Israeli uh journalists out of there quickly but they're obviously setting up a major position here
but the position the part of the position that's doing harm in Lebanon is this artillery command and
patrol post and it's been wiped out. So, Hezbollah targeting those that are killing people in
Lebanon um out of the many targets they have on these bases. Let's look at the next one because
we're still in Baya here again daily um sometimes multiple times a day targeting the same base uh in
the western sector. Um and Israel doesn't seem to have much defense for these. Um, and Hezbollah is
learning which targets to hit here. So, they're going to be hitting uh a group of Humvees here,
which is, you know, in the in the lexicon of Gaza, this is an appropriate weapon

for a Humvey. Um, you can certainly disable tanks. We watched it just happen a few moments ago. Um,
but the single round RPG, um, the single charge RPG round is really best designed for, um, these
Humvees, for the M113s, uh, for that artillery position. Those are smart uh, targets. Let's look at
the next one cuz it's the same. Uh, we've got three in a row here. They've um, here we see them
building them. This was also the part of the genius that all the fighters um, can assemble these
drones. And we're watching them assemble. There's the fiber optic spool um that's going to run a
fiber optic cable behind it, allowing for low latency, no jamming, um just strong response between
the controller um the pilot and uh the drone itself. And again, we're in the exact same spot. So,
this is drone after drone targeting these same spots. We're coming back to these uh

these Humvees. Um, and over the course of just this last week, all these operations are just in the
last week since you last saw me. Um, but they're wiping out these Humvees. Um, a single RPG round on
that Humvey will blow that Humvey to pieces and presumably burn the ones beside it. Um, so we're
seeing single hits here, but surely multiple um, destroyed Humvees in this strike. There's one more
to number 11. um over the same area again, same base. And one of the things to note is that we
haven't seen soldiers uh in all of these videos. The Israelis are hiding. There's been a few SCOPs
that the uh Hezbollah media uh arm has put out saying like, "Where are you guys?" Um because we
haven't seen any soldiers on these bases. But um while targeting these Humvees and tanks um the
Israeli soldiers are somewhere within a very very short walking distance of

these armored vehicles. So um it's um I don't want to make predictions, but I think we're going to
see uh an an increase in attacks on Israeli soldiers as this goes on uh in South Lebanon. So there's
another Humvey completely destroyed. Um let's look at the next one 11B here. This is from yesterday.
Um and amid all of the discussions in Israel um about what we can do, what Israel can do, you know,
I say we like them. Uh they're talking about uh what what are we going to do about these drones? Do
we make big nets? Um, here they have uh a counter UAV system and Hzbollah is just flying their drone
directly into Israel's uh counter FPV drone system. So, this system is set up um to essentially be
perimeter security for uh incoming FPV drones and is and Israel sets it up and Hezbollah destroys it
with an FPV drone. So, this

is designed to stop FPV drones. Um, and Hezbollah picks it out of a window like the old soldiers in
a window day. Um, they have their uh their drone protection uh system in a window. Um, so this is an
anti- FPV uh drone system that's about to knock out uh be knocked out by an FPV drone. So, um one
step forward, two steps back for the Israelis. Um we can go to the next one. Um because there was
soldiers here and when we see the soldiers here um the fact that there is such uh int intelligence
surveillance and reconnaissance all over these positions noticed um three jeeps arrive um with a uh
combat intelligence battalion that they identified here. and we're going to watch the soldiers get
out of their jeep and within um you know it looks like a few dozen feet of the jeep uh they're
immediately targeted by this incoming uh explosive

laden FPV drone. So there you see their jeeps and you can look at them. They're spitting distance uh
from getting out of their jeeps and they're immediately targeted here. There's the three of them on
the ground. The Israelis said two were wounded here, but you can watch the video and [snorts] um
we're not so sure about those. U we've never been sure about Israel's casualty reports. We remain
skeptical of them. Um let's take a look at 13. Or we can look at this one more. Yeah, it's okay.
Look at 13 here. Again, we're seeing this is something we saw later in the week. This crisp digital
video um feed. So we may be seeing a lot crisper attacks on Israelis. This is an attack uh we're
moving now to Bintage Bale. And you can see there's a tank upcoming there on the road. Um now it's
getting the Hezbollah circle triangle in Gaza circle in

Lebanon. It gets the red circle and a direct hit on uh it looks like this is a a hit on the uh
commander hatch which we've seen them picking on a number of times. We saw a video yesterday that
didn't make it in that missed our deadline but we'll show you next week where u they're aiming at
the commander hatch as well. Um, so they're clearly um advancing their targets and that's I think
appropriate with the uh RPG round that they are using. Um, let's look at number 14. This is versus
three tanks. Um, I stitched these together just so we didn't spend the whole show watching um, the
flights over South Lebanon. Although it's beautiful to watch the flights because it's a beautiful
area and um you know the reason why people are fighting so hard for this area um is shown in these
videos. The destruction by Israel, the genocidal ethnic cleansing is

seen in every picture. Here you see a hit on the reverse uh on the back end again that is also right
by the loaders hatch in that. So we could be seeing that um consistently. And then we have a a
couple of NER troop carriers uh down here that are going to be targeted. And again, in each of those
buildings, what we saw in Gaza was that Israel would destroy all of the buildings and then just
leave one building that they were uh they had their troops in. We can see what they're doing here in
Lebanon is they're spreading out their people. So there there are soldiers in that building that are
behind those tanks cuz those tanks, they're not getting out of the troop carrier and walking through
the village. Um so they're right there in those buildings and I think we'll probably see in coming
weeks um them targeted. On that day of

those operations um these were on the 30th of April. Israel admitted that two soldiers were wounded
inside tanks. So again we don't get battle damage assessments but we can uh sometimes read between
the lines on the Israeli casualty reports and see that two were wounded inside tanks. So, these
clearly work. Um, they might not be the most appropriate weapon for the thickness of the armor on
the Marova. Um, and that's what we saw in Gaza. And that's why the tandem warhead uh in Gaza was
such a game changer. Let's take a look at number 15 now. Um, again, spring in South Lebanon. And
then, uh, very quickly you see total destruction in Bintage Bale. It looks as though the Israelis
are attempting to erase vintage bail. Um, which we can clearly see from this footage. Um, and lots
of other footage as well here. He's going to pick up multiple targets again. And that's one

of the reasons that these drones are so useful is that they can loiter over the site. They reach the
site and then they can fly around. And here they see a Nomber with its rear door open. Um, and that
certainly uh you put an an 83 93 mm uh PG7VL uh RPG warhead into the inside of that Nomber and it's
going to destroy it. Um, in another report, this is not related to this video. So there's a second
report um from Wednesday that a Nomber um was hit and according to the Hzbollah field report it was
seen burning and then soldiers were seen evacuating. Um and then the and then Hezbollah says the
fighters targeted the evacuation force with artillery shells and enemy soldiers were seen fleeing
from the area. Um so there's destruction happening to these vehicles. There's no question about it.
Um but there is large po uh parts of the um the

merkova and the nommer and the nommer is a merkova just without a turret. So here we go right
through the back door. Okay, we'll go to the next one now because we can see it with a closed door
on this next one. Um again that right there is where soldiers are. And watch this drone pilot get
some reconnaissance in before he carries out his attack. He's looking under that. You can see
there's a vehicle. Um the tarp that's um to protect the soldiers that are clearly inside that
building. Um so full recon of the site. And now the fighters that are back uh with the controller,
although this can happen with just one person. That's the video pilot. Uh that's the advantage of
the video piloting. It can be a single person. You don't need anything to launch these drones. We've
seen them launch them off of cinder blocks. You can launch them off your

hand. Um, so but back at where they are uh launching from, you have intelligence units that are
watching each of these positions. They know each of the positions where they change day in and day
out. And so here they see a Nome. They pass on hitting the front of those Nomers that are facing it,
which wouldn't do any damage. But this here to hit the back door directly on the latch. We know that
from Gaza will blow out that back door. Uh Kasam did that in Gaza a number of times. So these are uh
destroying Israeli armor. And we've seen that through this whole week. This Nomber uh is probably
destroyed. The previous nom is for sure destroyed. You put an RPG round into the cabin of it uh and
it's going to burn. Uh let's take a look at the next one. Uh this is a D9 armored bulldozer also uh
in vintage bale.

Um so we've seen multiple nomers. We just saw but somewhere between three and six at least Humvees
destroyed. We saw the cook off uh of the Merkova um in the first video. This is one of two D9s on
this show that we're watching being destroyed. And again, this RPG round that the um FPV quadcopter
is carrying will destroy a D9 armored bulldozer. And that's why in Gaza, you can see it there, they
identify tanks. Um but they're going to pass on those tanks and hit a more appropriate target, which
is the bulldozer that is actively uh demolishing Vintage Bale on the one hand, but also does not
have defenses for a single round RPG. And that's why in Gaza, we never saw Yasin 105s fired at
bulldozers because it's unnecessary. An appropriate weapon is a single round RPG. And he's going to
put this right through the um the ba the base of that uh

D9 in um in Binge Bale. Let's take a look at 18 cuz while there's a lot of focus on FPV drones um
there uh is Okay, we'll watch it one more time. Okay, go. All right, here we go. So, here is a SCOP
that uh Hezbollah put out this week uh manufacturing the other kinds of drones that they fire in the
first period before this so-called ceasefire that doesn't exist. You know, there's more than 400
drone operations that were not strictly all FPV drones. We know about these other drones, the Scied
107s, Shahed 101's, and um here they're making an Ababil, which looks like um an Ababel 2T uh
version um that they're putting together. So there two types of drones being made here. Um and
they're going to tell you that it's the pride of Lebanese industry. Again, we saw a bunch of these
videos from Gaza about manufacturing their own weaponry. Um but

those drones they build their own uh larger fixedwing drones. Um they also put together their FPV
drones um from component parts and that's the wisdom of both aspects of this that you can
manufacture this locally. Um and Hezbollah has been doing it there. You see the pride of Lebanese
industry. Um there's been a number of these SCOPS this week. Um and then this is those drones being
launched. the same drones that you just saw being built. Uh here they are being launched. This first
one uh is the SCAD 107 and this is versus um and you can see there that's again pressure air
pressure launched so they don't leave a large heat signature fiberglass uh frame low signature and
Israel has a lot of trouble with these as well. And Hezbollah can fire them from safe positions. And
there's the Abmobile that we watched be of the type that we watched be built. Um, this

carries a heavier warhead um launched against Israeli troops. Um, and dozens of injuries um to
troops from these drone strikes. There was just 10 more um said were wounded today. There's a good
shot of the Abmobile with the forward wings on the nose cone. That's how you tell the difference
between those ones. Here it is launched again. Uh or yeah, it's launched again. Okay, let's take a
look at number 19. There's some anti- uh aircraft operations. This is a 358 missile. We're going to
actually watch it get launched. We don't usually get to see that, so that's a bit of a a treat for
people who have been watching this 358 missile down. MQ9 Reaper drones. This is a Hermes 450. We've
watched the Hermes 900 Elbit drones just get blown to pieces like we're watching here on screen and
you [snorts] can we're watching it through the um uh through originally through the missiles

um sites there. So um that's the missile that has taken down dozens of uh MQ9 Reaper drones, the
biggest US or the most uh commonly used large US drone. Um the Yemenes down two dozen of them in
Iran. There's been dozens of them as well and Hzbollah has used these in South Lebanon as well. And
so of all these destroyed vehicles, we saw the Nmer, we saw the half a dozen Humvees, we saw the
Marova, we saw two D9s, there was an excavator um crew that were killed that are contract workers
that are paid to uh by the number of houses they destroy. We saw that excavator be destroyed. We saw
that artillery bus be destroyed, an M113 destroyed, a counter uh unmanned aerial system destroyed.
So, a lot of uh physical equipment losses. Um and if we look to uh the next if we looked here this
Israel bragged about this this week that

since the launch of what they call operation roaring lion so the Iran war um and Lebanon war Israel
has received more than 115,600 tons of military equipment from the US in 43 airlifts and 10 sea
lifts. So we can see these next couple of pictures. These are the unloading of vehicles that we just
watched be destroyed in Lebanon. And this is the only way that Israel is able to fight. I've been
saying this since early Gaza. There's the Hammet. We watched those get destroyed last week on the
show. Um being resupplied for free um from the Americans. $25 billion in this resupply. And it's the
only way that the Israelis can carry on with any of their wars, their war in Gaza, their war in
Lebanon, and particularly their war in Iran. And Israel brags about this. The me the Ministry of
Defense official who's in charge of this says, "At any given moment, cargo,

aircraft, and ships are on route to Israel carrying thousands of tons of munitions and military
equipment. This is the core of our military strategy," he said. um yeah, and the ships have been
coming in um daily, many times a day. Uh airbridge uh and also unloading massive ships. Um, and
there you see the Hammets. We watched those get destroyed last week on the show. So, um, they get
destroyed by the resistance and the United States, um, resupplies them to the tune of tens of
billions of dollars to allow the war to continue. Um, so this has been the resistance report for day
944 of Israel's genocide in Gaza.
