Title: Israeli troops in FPV drone crosshairs, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-04-30
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=504BsSnX5Uc
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: core weekly / user supplied

You are watching and listening to the electronic inifatada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report on day 937 of Israel's genocide in Gaza. Today is day 59 of Hezbollah's defense of South
Lebanon. It is also day 62 of the US and Israel's war against Iran which is currently in a bit of a
blockade stalemate such as it is blockade such as it is. uh in the straight of Hormuz. The US
president said yesterday that he's waiting for Iran to say they give up. So, he's getting bad advice
on that. Today, we are going to focus on Lebanon. Let's go to the maps as we always do. I'll just
say I'm reporting this on the afternoon of Thursday, April the 30th. You're looking at the BBC map
of the area south of the Latani River, which was what Israel said that they were going to conquer uh
in this stage of the war. Um

they have not done so. Um but uh chief of staff of the Israeli military alamir said that there is no
ceasefire uh in Lebanon. There's still six uh IDF divisions operating in Lebanon. And we're hearing
from the Israeli soldiers a lot of the same things we heard from the final stage of the military
operation in Gaza during Gideon's chariots in that they are military is saying they are not fighting
Hzbalah they are destroying homes and making it so that there is nowhere to return to which is what
they said they were doing in Betanoon and Rafa in Gaza and to this day those things have held. Um so
that is their uh operational uh that's their their strategic objective is to erase those villages uh
along the border there. Um just yesterday there was a Harat's article with the headline that there's
no logic to this. Quoting scared IDF officers um talking about troops facing

deadly Hezbollah drones while demolishing southern Lebanon homes. Israeli soldiers describe risking
their lives to guard civilian contractors demolishing buildings in Shia villages near the Israel
border as they remain exposed to Hezbollah's explosive drones considered a significant challenge for
which there is no foreseeable future. Um again, so they're not defeating any resistance force.
They're not disarming any resistance force. They're carrying out a genocidal ethnic cleansing
rampage against civilians, which is basically, as we know, all the Israeli military is able to
achieve. Um, let's take a look at the second map, cuz this is more realistically what the Israelis
hope to achieve here in these villages in the south. This is what the Israelis call the anti-tank
line. They want to push um the villages, they want to push the border back um to an anti-tank line
that was originally 3 to 5 kilometers. Now they're talking about 10 km but they do not have military
control

in th those areas between 3 and 10 km. So um this is aspirational as it is right now but the anti-
tank line was supposed to cover uh 55 villages uh and towns in south Lebanon. Um to further of that
uh chief of staff of the IDF Al Zamir he was speaking to troops in South Lebanon when he said on the
combat this was yesterday on the combat front there is no ceasefire we continue to fight to remove
direct and indirect threats from the northern settlements any threat including crossing the yellow
line north of the latani will be removed and north of the latani two things beyond the yellow line
and beyond the uh and north of latani will be removed D. Um, it is your mission, he said to the
soldiers, and duty to operate with freedom of action. Remove any threat. At this stage, we are not
advancing beyond the yellow line, but we

are going to continue to operate to remove threats freely in that area. An um an Israeli military
officer told Harets yesterday that the only mission is to continue destruction. There is no other
mission. The IDF believes this systematic destruction of Shia villages will prevent villagers from
returning home. Another commander said that contrary to the IDF's claims that the soldiers are
destroying terrorist infrastructure in these villages, the destruction goes well beyond that. Quote,
it is is not terrorist infrastructure. We are destroying everything. It goes well beyond that. Uh an
officer said about Israel's plan so far. If we look at the next map here, you can see this is more
like uh more accurate of where uh Israeli vehicles have been far off 10 km. Um in some cases you can
see uh it's only hundreds of meters. Um and each of those triangles, you can see a triangle on the
far right on the coast

of that map and then you see one uh towards the central area and another one on the eastern edge.
And then going up the Galilee panhandle, you see three more triangles. Those are the Israeli bases
that they established inside Lebanon during the ceasefire. It was from those bases that they began
their operations. And you can see where those bases are and how far they moved. Not very far.
They're unable to move on the ground, which is consistent with their previous ground war in 2024,
where they were also repelled from advancing. Um, and so when they are militarily defeated, they
turn and destroy civilian homes, torture people in prisons, uh, as we heard on the previous report.
Um, so that is the situation as it stands right now. Everything you're going to see in this report,
as ever, it has been published in the previous week, uh, since you last saw me. Um, because of
operational

security reasons, various other reasons, some of the videos are published with a lag. sometimes up
to two weeks and sometimes they're published literally within minutes. So we're seeing the military
media department operating across a 100 kilometer front line and filing their reports within minutes
of the operation. So we're seeing full command and control um and um resistance uh on a level that
has the Israelis really scrambling right now. So let's take a look at some of the footage from the
past week. This is a psychological operations video. You could c uh classify this as this is a
Hzbollah video to the Israelis. Um it talks about the yellow line. It says no security zone whatever
depth will protect you once we decide to deploy these weapons. In essence is what it says. Don't let
your government fool you or don't be mistaken. Um especially by your government. Um and we're
watching here a video of

uh buried launchers uh various types of uh guided missiles, drones um and all of them have the
capability of striking um beyond even a 10 kilometer border well beyond um and that's something that
Israel has learned in this battle. um their goal was to get up to the Latani River uh thinking that
they would that that that would shut down Hzbollah's rocket and drone capabilities. But pretty
quickly into this stage of the war um like within a few days, the Israeli military realized that
most of these attacks were coming from far north of the Latani River and operating south of the
Latani was not going to stop the fire in any way. And this is Hezbollah just reminding us that that
is the case. Naim Kasum spoke this week um and he said the resistance reiterates five non-negotiable
conditions about this war. Number one, total cessation of aggression by land air and sea, withdrawal
of

Israeli troops from occupied territories, the release of prisoners, the return of all residents to
their towns, and reconstruction. He said the resistance maintains it will liberate every inch of
occupied land. Record this for history. He said, "The Israeli enemy will not remain on a single inch
of our occupied land, and our people will return to their lands um to the very inch of the southern
border with occupied Palestine. And together, our people, just as we resisted together, we will
rebuild together." So that's the secretary general of Hezbollah, Naim Kasam, speaking this week
about the fight. We've also heard him say that this fight is existential that they will fight to
their last breath um to liberate these uh lands in the south that Israel believes by destroying uh
will remove people's I don't know what they they think it will remove people's desire to move back
home. That's not the case and I don't think

these uh can hold up in Gaza or in Lebanon. Uh but we won't make any predictions at this stage uh in
the battle. Um the next one here we see um a traditional anti-tank operation. This is through a
thermal camera. You can see the uh Merkova tank arriving. You can see um the heat signature of its
engine which is in the front uh on a Merkova. And the reason it is on the front incidentally is
because of exactly this video that we're watching right now. a Cornet anti-tank guided missile
strike from up high on a hill, direct hit on the tank. Uh we're seeing an explosion of the tank and
it uh slowly coming to a stop. We're going to see in a minute here the uh targeted tank crewmen are
going to stumble out of the back of the tank um after this strike. The idea of putting the engine in
the front was

that uh you get an extra two tons or so of um of heavy steel and metal uh guarding. So that's why
the uh engine is in the front and we see the reason for it there. Uh in this here you see the
soldiers here they come out. Now one guy here being dragged. We're just seeing them as little dots
uh on the thermal camera. Um, but you can see that there's clearly injuries uh in this operation,
although none reported. I'm going to show you a few of these videos this week. Um, that there's
clearly casualties that were not reported, which is not surprising, but it's always uh useful to see
the examples of when they don't see you see this should soldiers there. Uh, Hzbollah put their
little red circle around them over off to the side of that clearly disabled tank. This operation was
on March 30th uh near Bintage Bale. Um and these

are their tank killer units, their anti-tank guided missile units that have here to for have been
the backbone of Hezbollah's operational disposition until the FPV drone uh era arrived as it has.
Um, and they are uh able to hit from a further distance with the FPV drones, the firstperson view
drones, than they are with these uh anti-tank missiles. Um, and so Israel's effort to make an anti-
tank line is useless against um against the drones that we are going to see for most of this show.
Um, and that has been something that has been surprising because the anti-tank units have been such
a consistent part of Hezbollah's operations. Um, and the Israelis know that and the Israelis have
been essentially hiding from that um, through the operations in South Lebanon. And that's what the
Israeli military was saying in that Harets article. They're not fighting. They're not looking for
Hezbollah fighters to engage and battle. um

they're not looking to disarm them. They know they can't do that. They know they can't defeat it.
So, what they're doing is simply destroying civilian property um as a response to uh Hezbollah's
resistance. Um let's take a look at number six now. Um there's going to be audio in this one. Yo yo
yo. What's good? Yo. So, this operation was on Sunday. You're seeing a medevac of wounded troops um
and then the medevac area, the landing area was targeted by multiple um FPV firstperson view drones
um right beside the uh medevac helicopter. This was in Taipei. Um, one soldier uh was killed in a
previous operation, four seriously wounded and two others moderately wounded in an operation that
we're going to see coming up next year. And then Hezbollah was able, this video came out through the
Israeli media on Sunday. Um, and within within an hour or so, uh, the Hezbollah video was published.

Again, showing total command and control, the ability to get the, um, the footage and show the
footage, uh, publish the footage all within this small window of time. Shows uh, the capability. You
can see the drone there just just misses. Nobody was injured by that uh, drone strike, though. You
heard the yao yao that uh are now pretty common especially from the uh Iran war when we hear
Israelis reacting to incoming missiles. Um let's take a look at the footage from the Hezbollah video
here. Um so we're watching again quadcopter drone. You're going to recognize this from the previous
month or so of reporting. Um you can see their blades on the side. You can see them traveling uh
through South Lebanon, identifying a tank here that is stuck and has personnel uh standing around um
the tank. I've edited uh the end of this video. Maybe tomorrow I can throw up my uh X

account that has the full view, but you can see there we've edited out uh the strike that you can
watch uh the full operation. It's just it's the same uh frames. I just blurred the um soldiers to
meet YouTube's um community guidelines. Uh but you can see six soldiers there. Um one killed, four
seriously wounded. You can also see that they didn't react at all to that incoming uh quadcopter
tanks are if the tank engine was on, even if the one behind it was on, you wouldn't hear it. Uh but
you can see here the video that we're watching. Um this is up towards um the top of the Galilee
panhandle. Um so there's the medevac helicopter and you're going to see the soldiers off to the
right and the uh the drone uh falls out of the sky just before um the strike. So it's not clear what
the target was. Hezbollah has targeted

medevacs. they don't um adhere to the same uh medevac um principle, I guess you could call it, that
uh Gaza does. Um but we'll see here in this next clip after this one that um it looks as though a
soldier maybe shoots the drone just at the last minute. The helicopter takes off uh rapidly. Um
these drones are very precise and that is their asset among other things. But here you can see from
this footage, we're showing footage now of Israeli soldiers. Um, and you can see they're soldiers.
These are not paramedics. These are soldiers from unit 669. It's a special operations forces unit.
And you can see the drone there get shot at. Possibly it was shot down. Um, and yeah, just to say
these are not um uh these are not medics. These are not civilian paramedics. the uh con 11 which is
Israel's state broadcaster they kind of put it straightforward they

said the investigation from the Israeli air force reveals that following the incident the air force
sent two the original incident was the tank uh crew getting hit um so following that incident the
air force sent two owl type rescue helicopters carrying medical teams and fighters from unit 669 now
unit 669 I've covered them a few times in relation to Gaza but these are um special operations
forces and their writings. They're special operations soldiers who are sent on other missions as
well. And those helicopters are not medical helicopters. Those are combat helicopters. Um so there
are some criteria distinctions to be made in that. Um and they are made by the Israelis. So we'll go
with uh the way they describe their own unit uh in this case. Let's look at number eight. Um here we
have um FPV Strike. First time they've shown us the build. Um from the side there, you could see it.

Um these builds are smart builds. I talked about them a couple of shows back. Um smart, clean,
cheap, uh assembly, easy to assemble, uh resilient supply chain. This drone is going to hunt down
this excavator that's actively demolishing houses right now. and uh deliver it more precisely than
any other ammunition that you could find directly into the cockpit of that um of that excavator. And
now we know from Israeli crews that they have soldiers around them protecting these uh guys
excavating and an excavator uh operator was killed this week. Um I'll get to that when we get up to
that video. Um, but the Israeli soldiers in Harat said that the part of this plan in South Lebanon
is a polygon is marked out for each of the units of the area showing the section that they are
responsible for raising. At the end of every day, there's an assessment of what was accomplished and

every commander is required to report on how many homes he destroyed. Each unit is assigned a number
of bulldozers operated and excavators operated by civilian contractors that the military is required
to protect. Um so that is what we are seeing in South Lebanon straight up from the uh nuts and bolts
of the Israeli operation. And you can see the the buildings in South Lebanon in all of these videos.
I mean, you're getting an aerial view of South Lebanon. You can see the terrain, how difficult it is
to fight in. Uh how much of an advantage the uh local guerillas have over the uh you know, the
Israeli military that doesn't operate in these hills. And so you can see that direct hit right there
on the excavator. Um let's go to the next one because then uh I have a I pulled the the build there
so you can see the build. Um, you can

see what is I think the fiber optic cable up at the top. You can see the fiber optic cable wrapped
around it. Um, the spooling is kind of odd on this one, but this is what is brilliant about these
builds. Um, is that the they're all built by component parts and depending on the payload, depending
on the distance, they can alter the battery array, which is the blue that you see there. um they can
add more or less fiber optic cable which is essentially a fishing line that connects to the command
controller which gives instant feedback low latency um and it's extremely accurate. So, um, and it's
also, uh, resists all of the Israeli tools that are supposed to block these, um, electronic warfare.
Um, their active protection systems, you'll see in upcoming videos, um, are unable to stop them. Um,
but there you can see the basic build and you see the RPG warhead,

um, that's hanging underneath there. So, you're delivering precisely um uh a a pretty devastating
warhead uh onto whatever part of the vehicle or target that you want. And that is what makes these
um so difficult for the Israelis to stop and has really tilted the battlefield in Lebanon. Let's
take a look at number 10. Um this you can see another build here that's the opposite of that one. Um
going up, you can see the quadcopter. That's what it looks like from the ground. That's also the
first time they've shown us the takeoff of that. So, they're giving us lots of information in these.
Um, right now it's flashing low battery, so they're obviously able to um to have just enough because
you don't want to have extra batteries. You don't want to be carrying extra weight. Um, and so they
have these down dialed in. You'll watch a bunch of these videos this week. Um,

the batter is running out as it's coming in. So, we watched it there fly over the target. Didn't
just dive down on the target. It's flying back over it at a controlled speed. Very slow. Uh, too
slow for um the uh active protection system radars, although these are going to hit a jeep that
doesn't carry those. These are Land Rover jeeps that are usually used by special operations forces.
Um, Hezbollah identified it as a command vehicle. um both seem accurate descriptions of of that
particular targeting. Um but the uh fiber optics also allow them to get down onto the ground level.
You'll watch here almost skips through the grass. Um the radio signal um wouldn't work as well in
the hills. Um and so there you see the jeep direct hit on that. Um on Sunday, Hezbollah released a
statement that's uh that said, "Hasbah clearly and decisively confirms that the enemy's continued
violation of

the ceasefire, its continued attacks against including shelling, bulldozing, and destruction of
homes or targeting of civilians, and before all that, its continued occupation of Lebanese lands and
violations of its sovereignty will be met with response and resistant resistance present and ready
to defend its land and its people, a right guaranteed by international charters. We will not wait
for or bet on failed diplomacy that has proven its futility, nor on the authorities negligent in
protecting their homeland. Um, for the people of this land are the true guarantors of the true
guarantee is in confronting uh the aggression and repelling the occupation. Um, let's take a look at
number 11. Um, this is in vintage bale again against destructive uh D9 bulldozers um that are
destroying homes. Again, uh you can see some of the um some of this onscreen signals that they get.
Um and there you see the target, a D9 Caterpillar bulldozer on the

BDS list. Caterpillar. Um it's going to get hit again right in the cockpit. And the IDF is
scrambling about these um quadcopters because they they don't have any defense for them. The army
radio said that the um the improvements to soldiers weapons is one of the ideas to increase the
ability to hit the drones. Um there are special intentions and also fragmentation ammunition that
can be fired at the drone to increase the chances of hitting it. So shotguns basically is what
they're saying. It was decided to reduce helicopter landing times inside Lebanese territory so that
the time the helicopter is on the ground during the casualty evacuation is minimized to reduce the
possibility of Hezbollah locating the helicopter and trying to hit it. Again, intelligence will uh
Hezbollah intelligence will make that useless. Um they want to deploy various types of radars
extensively within Lebanese territory. Um, again, radars aren't going to work unless you

want your radar to pick up every single bird that's flying and then you're going to pop off your uh
your weaponry at the bird that your radar caught. There's really no uh solution. We saw it actually
yesterday. Uh I didn't bring it on, but probably a lot of you who are watching this saw this. The
Israelis testing, it looked like testing one of their Hummers with uh Ukrainian style uh netting all
over the Jeep. Um, and that's really the only solution that they have found in uh, Ukraine is
massive fishing nets uh, to put massive fishing nets above their positions. Um, so we'll see where
Israel goes with this, but um, this has been a remarkable advanced battlefield um, adaptation,
tactical adaptation that we're literally seeing um, hour by hour if not uh, a day by day if not hour
by hour. So, let's take a look at the next one. Number 12, I think

we're on now. Is that right? This is in Cana again. Um, near Bintage Bale and we're seeing the
beautiful hills of South Lebanon. A lot of these videos are remarkable for what you see in this
area. Um, and this one is no exception to that. This is against a moving vehicle and the Israelis
have complained um that the uh the threat is more significant when they're out in the open um which
is matches uh the the battlefield in Ukraine um that the open areas and commuting vehicles like this
one here, the Humvey that's going to come up. drone is going to come up behind it um and put it into
or attempt to put it into the back door of this Humvey. We don't see the final detonation, but
again, it's carrying an anti-tank warhead um 93 mm anti-tank warhead that has um the ability to
penetrate um as much as 500 mm of rolled

homogeneous armor. And that is not what is on those Humvees. So to deliver these weapons, and that's
also why the net won't work. You put a net over this vehicle that we're watching right here, the RPG
round just gets caught in the net and then detonates over top of the troops. So um not super useful.
Um let's go to 13. Uh this is against uh another beautiful shot of South Lebanon in the spring and
showing the roads that the Israelis have to travel along um to get through these valleys. Um and
that is the their willingness to go through these valleys simply to destroy homes and take
casualties every day. Another soldier was killed today. 13 more were wounded today in uh in FPV
drone strikes. Again, FPV stands for p firstperson view, which is what we're seeing here. The pilot
is looking at the same thing that we're looking at. Again, low battery um

which is optimizing the um the build the the drone build to um you know, have one less battery,
gives you more uh distance, more range. That's an Eton uh eight-W wheeled uh troop carrier that got
hit there directly on the top. Um these Etons are we saw them a little bit in Gaza, but these are
new vehicles um since the two 2000 since the 2023 war began. Again, this is all the same war that
started on October 7th. We cover it that way and um every all the players see it that way as well.
Um so again low battery you optimizing right up to the point of uh a direct hit. If you have too
much weight you slow down you shorten your range um and your effectiveness again at strike on the
top of that in vintage bale um 14. We're going to see another one here aiming directly at the active
protection system

right directly on it. This hit is going to show you um so you see in the comments a lot and we deal
with it a lot in this uh corner of work that uh every Israeli believes that every single round ever
fired is intercepted by their blessed uh trophy active protection system which you can see right
there. It's that's literally what they're hitting. That's the reloader. To the left is the launcher.
If it launched, you would see a something uh something less than a shotgun blast, but uh many small
EFPS, explosively formed penetrators are fired out um at the uh incoming target. This target is too
slow, has too low a signature, has almost no signature, although the warhead it's carrying has a
signature. U but you can see it did not deploy. um on that as well. The system failed. The speed of
the drone, the calibration to deal with a Cornet anti-tank missile

on one hand that's going 25 or 30 times as fast as the drone um makes it impossible to calibrate um
because you'd be firing off at um at birds would be the primary one. If you were to lower your
calibration enough to to encapsulate um these quadcopters, you'd be um you'd be send it would be
sent off for every bird. So um there you can see straight ahead above the crosshairs right there on
the left. That's the launcher of the APS. Um the next video is against uh another excavator. These
have been consistently targeted. You can see the destruction in uh and this is in vintage bale. Um
systematic destruction with uh bulldozers but also with um carrying explosives like we saw in Gaza
um to carry out the demolitions. And this is again an active um excavator. You can see it moving uh
an excavator that not in this this was from April 14th

this operation. um again directly into the cockpit of a manned uh excavator actively demolishing
homes. This killed um not this but another uh excavator strike killed one of the civilian um
contractors, military contractors and his son was seriously wounded by shrapnel. And interestingly
um from Armory Radio, according to procedures introduced in the IDF during the war, all employees of
contractor companies sign a document before entering Lebanon acknowledging that they will not be
recognized as fallen IDF soldiers. Um so their families don't get uh compensation for them getting
killed. They signed a waiver. Um, and that's how Israel treats its u I mean there's there's nothing
civilian about that operation. It's clearly a military operation. It's a paramilitary operation at
the very least. Um but they don't want to give them uh they don't want to give the civilian
contractors um the benefits that are given to soldiers families. So that's kind of another dark
element

of uh the overall genocidal project that Israel is rampaging through the region with. Let's take a
look at number 16. Now this is in Mesa Jabo and you can see the build here again. You're seeing at
the back there um applying the detonator where the rocket motor would be. And there you see the
drone. Um I'll show you after this. So, I have a still of this one, but you can see this is an uh
fiber optic. It's running on fiber optics. And fiber optics just mean that when the controller
presses forward, down, sideways, any move, it's instant. Um, and that just makes flying these um it
just makes that's part of what makes them such a deadly uh tool. Here they're hitting the front um
of of the marova. Here you're seeing it dive down and hit the front of it which normally you
wouldn't say would be the best target. Um they're built

with uh under especially the under uh carriage is really heavily fortified for um you know
groundbased bombs, roadside bombs. Um but we we see this one when the second tank uh is hit uh you
can see that there's two strikes on the same tank. Um, and you can see that there is um some sort of
transmission fuel uh fluid or some sort of fuel that has spilled out. It's clearly disabled the
tank, which is why the uh they have a second shot out of here. So, we're seeing these kind of
tactical adaptations. Now, they're sending two drones. That's what they did in that medevac strike
was two drones. It was two drones against that uh tank where the soldiers were. Um and there's two
strikes against uh this same tank uh here in Mesa Jabo direct strikes on both because of the
precision of the uh of the weapon. So this is this is the

fiber optics. This is the first time they showed us this. We've seen it before. We saw it on crashed
um on crashed drones. Um but this is the first time they've shown us the actual uh the obvious
spool. I think that previous one was a spool. They had it on top and it was square. Um but this is
the more conventional way to do it. And essentially that bottom part that you see there with the
nose um spits out like a like a fishing rod spits out um essentially something equivalent to a
fishing line um and it drags it behind while it's flying and that's how you get the sharp commands.
You're basically connect you're literally connected to uh the command or the controller is literally
connected to the device. There's no radio signal that could be blocked by electronic warfare or by
hills or by buildings on those hills like we've seen in these

previous videos. Um so it's very effective and this is um you know something that we've seen in the
war in in Ukraine where entire villages are just covered with um what it looks like fishing line but
are the fiber optics and there's really no uh defense against these. Um, Army Radio told commanders,
uh, a commander told Army Radio, "There's not much to do about it." Um, said a commander currently
fighting in Lebanon, "The briefing the troops receive boils down to be alert and if you spot a
drone, try and shoot it." So, that's where they're at with it. And kind of counterintuitively, the
um fiber optics allows the um the drone in some cases to fly at a greater distance. It extends the
range. Um again because of the hills and the ways that the radio signals can be knocked down. Um so
interesting developments and there you see it for the first time. Um

we saw it this week for the first time and you can see the warhead on the top that is the PG7 VL.
It's an Iranianbuilt anti-tank warhead um that can do considerable damage. U let's look at number
18. This is a um an encanter again. Um this is each of these videos are the ones from this week.
This was from Friday. Uh Hzbollah says specifically what the ceasefire violation that they are
responding to is. So they are upholding the ceasefire, but they're responding to everything that
Israel is doing. They're not allowing this um ceasefire to be a continuation of the war like Israel
wants to try to achieve what they can't achieve in battle um by doing it during a ceasefire
demolishing homes. There you see the hit on the Humvey there using a house as a base. And you can
see that these vehicles because of the drones um they've moved everything inside. We

see all the vehicles parked right up close to the buildings where they are um and backed right up
into the buildings to leave as little time as possible for um the strikes. And again, just beautiful
uh it's beautiful area, South Lebanon. It's um it's a crime what's happening to it literally. Um
okay, let's look at number 19. This is against a NEMR troop carrier. This is in Canthra again. Um
this is near Bintage Bale. Again the massive, you know, terrorist hillsides, massive destruction
through Bintage Bale is um you know, devastating to see. Bintage Bale is uh heart of the resistance.
Um and here, okay, so here the drones coming down on the Nom troop carrier. You're going to see the
soldier's uh helmet, the tank uh the armored personnel carrier crew mate, that's the driver
presumably or commander popping out of his hatch there um during that strike. Again, no um no
casualty report on

this one. This is from uh just the other day a um early this week. Um, a lot of people say that they
cut off early, that the the footage cut off early, which proves that uh in this particular shot and
the other ones that their active protection system has intercepted this. And this is just absurd for
people who see these comments and want to uh to know if this is true. Um, it's not. If you had the
APC, if you had the APS on right now with a crewman outside the tank, the crewman would be hit by
the fire, it would intercept this uh RPG round over top of the head of the soldier um and explode it
in that area. So, they're not being intercepted. That is not what's happening here. Um and that's
why Israel is scrambling at the moment. Um number 20, we got one more of these. Um there you can

see the uh fiber optics there linked up to the computer. Again, a different build that this time the
warhead is on the top. This is the genius of the Hezbollah drone builds um because you can use
different parts, different batteries um for particular missions and that's what we're seeing um
various different setups of these quadcopters. There's not a single um outofbox um uh quadcopter.
They're putting them together by piece by piece. And the pieces are all in other products. So,
they're resilient supply chain. Um and it's really something that the Israelis can't do anything
about. Um so there you see the direct hit uh on the uh the Marava here. This was from April 11th. So
sometimes we get them from further back. Um and that build represents um that time uh April 11th. So
you can see there uh we're seeing a good footage of it there with the um with the warhead on

top. Okay, let's go to the next one. We've got some down footage here. Um we've got the audio
included in this. So that is a uh Hermes 450 being downed by uh by Hezbollah uh manportable air
defense system surfaceto-air missile. And this video came out before the Hezbollah video. Um the
guys on the ground are saying it's a drone. It came down. came down. It's coming apart and they're
um they're south of Ty seur uh on the coast. Uh and this drone is being knocked out. This is the
this was this particular one was the sixth. Um but there's been two more since this one. So I think
we're now at eight uh Hermes drones. Elbit also on the BDS list. Elbit drones here falling from the
sky uh being destroyed by the resistance. probably uh we can see in the next video. Um you can see
the fighter again. So we saw from above

here we see the fighter holding the manportable surfaceto-air missile in the bush. Um and you can
just see the advantage that the guerrillas in South Lebanon have to carry out these operations after
seeing um the overhead view of the mountains and the bush and uh lots of places for cover and
concealment. And here is the Hezbollah uh here's Hezbollah adding this video into their uh video and
publishing it again within a couple of hours of the original video uh being shown. So command and
control and there we see it on the ground. So significant week of operations for Hzbollah. No signs
uh no end in sight uh if we can quote our good friend. Um, and that has been the resistance report
for day 937 of Israel's genocide in Gaza.
