Title: Israeli leaders admit defeat
Date: 2026-04-11
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MKn5HRkLy48
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: user supplied

Ali, can you talk a little bit about how the media, you know, corporate mainstream pro-state media
is covering this and and and and what you're looking at. Well, since we only have a very short time,
I'm just going to make a couple of of points and point to a couple of things that I think are worth
noticing. Remember that Donald Trump, Pete Hegseth, the US war secretary or secretary of defeat as I
like to call him, are all saying this is a fantastic victory, a stunning victory and the US is doing
so well. But, what is actually being said? So, I'm going to point to two stories. One The first one
a lot of people talking about is in the New York Times. It's a long story headlined how Trump took
the US to war with Iran. And it says that in early February well, it talks about the key role Israel
played in early

February. Benjamin Netanyahu went to the White House and made his pitch. He told Donald Trump that
Iran was ripe for regime change and promised a fast decisive victory. Israeli officials even staged
a stick slick presentation with the intelligence chiefs there on video, the head of the Mossad,
David Barnea. And it worked. Trump reportedly reacted, "Sounds good to me." But, when US
intelligence officials took a hard look, the story fell apart. The CIA director Ratcliffe called key
parts of Israel's plan farcical. Even Secretary of State Marco Rubio called it pardon my French,
Israel's top general, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Dan Cain told Trump, "Sir, this is in my
experience standard operating procedure for the Israelis. They oversell and their plans are not
always well developed. They know they need us and that's why they're hard selling." Advisers also
warned Trump that it would be impossible to stop Iran controlling the Strait of Hormuz.

None of that stopped the momentum. Trump was fixated on killing Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's
leader, and crushing its military and just brushed aside all doubts. Only one person in the room
really pushed back and that was Vice President J.D. Vance. He warned of regional chaos, spiraling
costs, and unpredictable retaliation. But, ultimately Vance said he would support whatever the
president decided and he and everyone else went along and and Trump made the call, "I think we need
to do it." Now, in part this article reads like an effort to exonerate Vice President J.D. Vance of
responsibility, perhaps to preserve his political prospects. But, we wouldn't be seeing this story
if the war was a stunning success. This is part of the blame game and it's also remarkable to see
Israel's role given such prominence. Normally, the New York Times would conceal the Israeli
influence, but that's part of pushing the responsibility off of the United States

and onto Israel. Of course, this is the US is responsible. A second article appears in the
Washington Post. A couple This is just 2 days ago, earlier this week. And the headline there,
"Hegseth's boastful claims about Iran contradict reality, officials say." So, this is citing unnamed
administration officials throwing Pete Hegseth under the bus. I'll just read one sentence from this
article. >> [cough] >> "Pete is not speaking truth to the president," one administration official
said. "As a result, the president is out there repeating misleading information." So, we can expect
that Pete Hegseth is not going to stay in his job very long. Again, we do not see too many senior
officials rushing to claim ownership and credit for this uh incredibly successful war. And then Asa,
I think you've been looking at how uh top Israeli politicians have been talking about this. Tell us
very quickly what's going on there. Yeah, there's been sort of

mutual recriminations amongst the Israeli politicians about the war which Netanyahu's opponents
perceive to be an unprecedented defeat actually. I mean, even allowing for the fact that they have
their own political axes to grind in terms of the upcoming elections expected inside um the Zionist
entity later this year. They are using extremely strong language. You can see this the tweet here on
the screen from Yair Lapid, the leader of the opposition in the Knesset describing the the temporary
ceasefire, truce, whatever you you know, you want to call it, whatever is actually going to happen.
Nevertheless, he's describing it as a real disaster. He says he says there's never been such a
political disaster in all of our history. Israel wasn't even at the table when decisions were made
by the US, he means obviously, concerning the core of our national security. You know, he's
obviously supporting the military, supporting the genocide and so on and so

forth, but saying it will take years to repair the political and strategic damage that Netanyahu has
wrought due to arrogance and lack of strategic planning. The next one is another Israeli opposition
leader. Sorry, there's a set Sorry, thanks Yes, tomorrow, you're right. Um there's a second one from
Yair Lapid where, you know, he's he's making a speech on TV and said, "Netanyahu led us to a
strategic collapse." I mean, that's that's pretty significant that you know, he's saying that, you
know. Again, these are opposition in name only, right? They're supporting the genocide, they're
supporting the destruction of Iran. They're just saying Netanyahu's not doing it effectively enough.
And the next one is from Golan, who is the head of the Labor Party, I believe. They're called
something else now. The Democrats, I think it Who cares? But, the historic Labor Party inside so-
called Israel, they're much smaller now than they used to be, of course.

They carried out some of the worst crimes in the history against the Palestinians including the
Nakba and the invasion of 1967. Anyway, they're they're a much smaller opposition force now, but
nevertheless, he as well is saying, "Netanyahu promised a historic victory and in practice we got
one of the most severe strategic failures Israel has ever known." Again, allowing for you know,
their political and electoral axes to grind. Very strong language. You can see Israelis themselves,
Israeli political leaders themselves or some of them consider this to be a very significant setback
for them. And let's not deny them their defeat. >> [laughter]
