Title: Israel brings Gaza doctrine back to Dahiya, with Roqayah Chamseddine
Date: 2026-03-14
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lYxMDuBwW6c
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: Lebanon context

We, caught up with Rania Chemal Sedin, wonderful journalist, researcher and co-host of the delete
your account podcast who spoke to us from from Lebanon yesterday. We recorded this at a time when
when she was able to join us. So, let's go to that interview and then we'll we'll come back and have
your analysis and John's analysis. I'm Ali Abunimah here with my colleague Nora Barrow Friedman.
You're watching and listening to the Electronic Intifada live stream. Since the United States and
Israel launched their war of aggression aiming to topple the government of Iran on February 28th,
Lebanon has once again once again become a major frontline of confrontation. On March 2nd, the
resistance group Hezbollah launched rockets and drones against Israeli military targets. This
followed the US-Israeli murder of Iran's leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and more than 10,000 Israeli
violations of the so-called ceasefire between Israel and Lebanon signed in November 2024. Along with
the continued

Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory in violation of that agreement, Israel has launched a
bombing campaign across Lebanon's south and east, particularly in the southern suburb of Beirut,
striking homes and infrastructure in densely populated neighborhoods. Lebanese authorities report
that almost 600 people have been killed and more than 1,400 wounded since the escalation began while
over 750,000 people are displaced, mostly from the south as families flee Israeli bombardment. Aid
agencies warn that hospitals are overwhelmed and the country faces a deepening humanitarian crisis
as hundreds of thousands seek shelter in schools, vehicles and improvised camps. In Nabi Sheet in
the eastern Bekaa Valley on the night of March 6th to 7th, Israeli helicopters inserted a commando
unit that attempted to dig up a grave in a cemetery searching for the remains of an Israeli military
pilot who has been missing for decades. The infiltration was discovered and Hezbollah fighters and
local residents confronted the invaders. Israeli warplanes launched

dozens of air strikes to cover the withdrawal of the troops. The air strikes and fighting killed at
least 41 people and wounded around 40 in Nabi Sheet and the Israeli forces withdrew. Hezbollah is
responding to Israel's attacks on Lebanon with sustained rocket, missile, and drone fire against
Israeli military positions and settlements. Israel has admitted it is having difficulty intercepting
the group's drones. We'll be hearing more about the military situation from our colleague John Elmer
later in the program. Politically, the escalation has intensified divisions inside Lebanon. The
western-backed government has attempted to outlaw Hezbollah, accusing it of drawing the country into
a wider war. The movement and its supporters insist Israel's repeated violations of Lebanese
sovereignty make armed resistance unavoidable. The only question, they say, is whether Israel should
be allowed to choose the moment of a major escalation or whether the resistance should take the
initiative. Joining us now from Lebanon is Rukaiya Shams Eddin.

She is a southern Lebanese researcher and reporter and co-host of the Delitcher Account podcast. She
herself has been forced forcibly displaced from the Dahieh, Beirut's southern suburb, and she joins
us now from Beirut. Rukaiya, welcome to the Electronic Intifada livestream. Thank you so much for
having me on again. I'm honored to be here with y'all. So good to have you again, Rukaiya. Thanks,
Rukaiya. As I just said, you are displaced. Describe for what you have experienced since the March
2nd escalation and what the situation is right now for people in Beirut, especially those from the
Dahiyeh and the south of the country. So, since March 2nd, this is the latest Israeli aggression, an
extension of the ongoing over 16-month aggression against Lebanon. The The very fabric of daily life
in Beirut, not just in Dahiyeh, but in the southern regions and in the Bekaa Valley has been
violently targeted by the US and Israel. And

I want to make that clear. This isn't just Israel because the US is more or less leading the charge
here, but families have been This is a forcible displacement. We are being ethnically cleansed. No
one is heating Israeli warnings. They are telling us, "We are going to bomb your neighborhoods.
We're going to bomb the houses, the residential buildings." And if you've ever been to Dahiyeh, if
you've ever seen photos of Dahiyeh, the the buildings are nestled very close to one another. So, if
there is a so-called targeted bombing, I I don't even like describing it that way. They it will
knock out other buildings, other stores. People have been forced to leave behind every possession
they have. But at the same time, I've witnessed a lot of Our community is very resilient. We've been
forced to be resilient, but displacement has become a daily condition for over 700,000 people. And
those are just the people

that have registered as being forcibly displaced. Um I think that what's happening and and what I've
seen There are people sleeping in front of the the ocean. There are people sleeping on top of
buildings outside of Dahiyeh and Shiite. But again, we understand that we need to be resilient, and
this resilience is inseparable from the resistance. And and we understand that we're we're going to
to remain as strong as possible in order to continue this. So, I I I mean the the one positive that
I've seen out of all of this is just how strong our community has been despite what we've been
forced to endure. And today, as we as we're speaking Israel has announced that they will bomb
Dahiyeh and and multiple places in surrounding areas. Places that we walk every single day. Places
that we we have raised our families every single day. So, this is what we're forced to endure and

we're forced to endure it in the shadows of, as you said, a complicit government with which has
abandoned us. Well, we'll talk more about the the government and the politics in Lebanon um in a
bit, Ruqaiya, but right now, I want to ask you about how people from the south and from the southern
suburb of Beirut how are they being treated in different parts of the country? Are people welcoming
them? Are people making efforts to provide refuge, shelter, food, and so on for this enormous number
of displaced people? It's something like almost a quarter of Lebanon's population. Right. And while
there have there have been people who have been offering food and shelter and that because people
need to understand these are not just individual. Whenever there was the first announcement to hit
Dahiyeh, I was actually on the road. All of a sudden, we the in the taxi, everyone was wondering why
the traffic

had stopped. And it was because Abi Khay had announced uh that Israel would they everyone needs to
leave Dahiyeh now because they're going to hit Dahiyeh. And I want people to picture that. You No no
warning really and then being told everything you have, you're going to lose it. Everything you
Wherever you're coming from, you need to leave. People are walking on foot from different villages
in South Lebanon, walking on foot from Dahi, and while Lebanon is small, the areas are massive. So,
you were walking for hours. People abandoned their vehicles out of fear of what was coming. So,
there have been people opening their homes and offering food and and shelter and what have you, but
at the same time, there is a large portion of this country who are being discriminatory against
those from South Lebanon. They will discriminate against you based on your accent, based on the way
that some women wear

their hijab because they wear it a certain way in the southern villages. So, and then they're
charging 6 months uh rent and a charge like as if they're a hotel. You can live here, but I need 6
months. I need you to pay for management services, whatever that is, cleaning services, or they're
refusing to let you stay at all because of where you're from. They say out of fear that Israel will
talk, you know, target the buildings, but it is it is a form of discrimination that this community
has faced for decades. It did not begin now. Rokayya, uh in the introduction, uh Ali talked a little
bit about the Israeli attack in the town of Nabi Sheet in the eastern Bekaa Valley. You went there
yourself just a few days ago. You posted a brief video on social media. Let's watch it and then uh
tell us about what you saw in the town

and what what people told you about the Israeli invasion and attack. Let's go to that video. I'm in
the village of Nabi Sheet Lebanon reporting from the uh Israeli attack. Tell us what what we saw
just there. Um and uh and these images that you sent us are also from the village. Um tell us about
the attack. So, the attack occurred a few days ago, I would say I if I remember correctly because
all the days are running together. It was around the 7th or 8th of of March. There was an overnight
incursion into the village of Nebi Sheet nearby the village of Nebi Sheet. And the incursion was
stopped. Um a full expansion into the village was sought by not only Hezbollah, but locals,
residents. Um the town once you go into the town, the heart of the town, the mayor's house was
completely bombed. The bombing was so intense. There footed There's images

that I I took of the vehicles. They were actually up into the buildings, into the the height of the
buildings. What you're seeing right now. That That's like four four levels and it would the vehicles
were all the way up top. The crater was so massive. It reminded me of the attacks that happened in
Haret Hreik in Dahieh. The one that killed uh Sayed Hassan Nasrallah. That was something that I was
reminded of. Um whenever the Israelis went in to allegedly get the the remains of the uh pilot uh
His name is Ron Arad. I don't I frankly don't care what his name is. They went in and the people
that were there around the cemetery, they noticed that there was digging. Something was happening.
And one story I want to tell people that I I'm going to try and cover in depth later is that a woman
with her family, um her children, I

I believe her oldest son was in his 20s, saw what was happening and she pulled out her gun. I I
don't know what type of gun, but she had a gun. And she They approached her house where her children
were and she shot at them. She shot um They I was told that at least two of them were shot by her. I
don't know what happened to them, but they ended up killing her and killing all of her children. And
that was near the cemetery that they were digging. And the cemetery belongs to the Shukor family.
And one of the members of the Shukor family was actually abducted. He's one of the prisoners being
held and tortured by Israel. Currently, over 20 Lebanese citizens are being held in captivity and
our government has done and said nothing about them. But, whenever I went into the village, this is
in the eastern part of Lebanon. It

is not South Lebanon. The the the area of Baalbek, the people there are known to be incredibly
fierce, strong, and armed. Women and men and even children know how to defend their community in the
the eastern area of Lebanon. It is very beautiful, but you everywhere I went in the village, there
was signs of not just the attack that happened a few days ago, but attacks that happened before. At
one of the sites where they killed 13 people, they had actually killed people nearby before,
including children. The youngest uh person that they killed in the recent incursion and attack on
Nabi Sheet was only 2 years old. I I watched as his uh as the casket went by. It was incredibly
moving because of just how loved all of these people were. It's a very tight-knit community.
Everyone knew everyone. Um I got I was honored to be able to speak and sit with a

lot of the martyrs' families. One of them was a very old woman. She told me how her son was engaged
for about 5 months and they killed him before or his wedding was in 5 months and they killed him
before he was supposed to get married. Um I I can this also involved the Lebanese army because
before Israel the Israelis went into the village, uh there was signs that something was happening.
They were coming in This is how disturbing the situation is. They were coming in wearing Lebanese
army uniforms and an ambulance made to look like a Lebanese uh health authority ambulance. So, this
was pre-planned. And then, a few days ago, they tried again to go into Nabi Sheet and were prevented
from doing so. So, this was a a collaborative effort by Hezbollah, the locals that were fighting and
also the army helped. So, Rima, you're saying the Israelis tried to come in

disguised as medics? They tried to come in disguised as members of Lebanese army and yes, they used
an ambulance to try and go in as well. Which of course is a war crime under international law. It's
it's a war crime to impersonate um medical personnel. I believe it's even a war crime to wear the
uniforms of another army. That's the crime of perfidy. Um but it's also all all the time. Yeah, I
was going to say that we saw this tactic in Gaza at the the most intense parts of the ongoing
genocide. But of course this is a you know, an army that has no red lines, has no morals, respects
no law. What some of Talk about just you know, I've been it's been a few years but I've been to
Eastern Lebanon and it is absolutely beautiful. I've also been to the south and I've visited many of
the villages there. Um and

these are beautiful places. Talk about what you saw between you know, traveling to the Bekaa Valley
and when you were in Nabatieh, how widespread We saw the pictures were were pretty uh intense but
how widespread is the bombing? How how present are the Israeli attacks on Lebanon right now? So, in
the eastern part of the Bekaa Valley, they're not just bombing different villages. They're also um
picking off members of the resistance or anyone associated Some of them aren't even part of
Hezbollah using drones strikes. This is happening in the Bekaa Valley. They're bombing the
mountains. They're bombing the villages. They're bombing the roads. They're bombing roads that are
that if you you've been there the area of Eastern Lebanon, like South Lebanon, they're the way that
they're built is that if you cut off one road, you can cut off all access to the entire village,
which is something they intend to do. They Whenever

they hit Nabi Sheet, they also hit an area where the water and and the power was, intentionally
trying to make it so this community, if the Israelis went in and stayed, they're going to be
starved. They're going to be prevented from having any access to the outside world because again,
this is a very tiny village without They already have a rough time getting in and out of of these
places. And I want to briefly talk about South Lebanon. Um They My village, Autobahnium, I've
written for Electronic Intifada about Autobahnium before. They've hit our village at least five
times in the last week and a half. They killed four members of my extended family in Zawtar
Sharqiyeh, which is outside of Autobahnium. They had just built their house. I I believe they just
newly built a house there, and they targeted them while they were having um either suhoor or iftar.
It happened at night, and

they killed everyone. Um the two children, the mother, and the father. So, this is what we're
dealing with. And then we're not the only family that has suffered this. In Eastern Lebanon, they've
taken out entire families, including today. They killed at least seven people. Um they're killing
paramedics. They're doing double tap strikes. They are trying to make it so not only are they going
to ethnically cleanse us, but they're putting a price on being in solidarity with the resistance.
That's also why they're hitting Dahieh. If people think they're hitting Hezbollah infrastructure in
Dahieh, you're kidding yourself. They're doing this in order to extract a price. They're saying, "If
you want to support Hezbollah, we're going to take everything from you." But if you And I've
interviewed hundreds of Lebanese people in and outside of Beirut who tell me, "If I have to sleep in
my car, if I have to sleep on the road, I'll

do it because there's no other way. We've been killed for 15, 16 months, and no one said anything.
But as soon as Hezbollah fired those six or so rockets on the 2nd of March, the entire world said,
"No, no, no. They they want to extract a price from us and we're willing to pay it, no matter what
happens." Mhm. Well, let's talk more about that uh I don't know if it's the right even to call it a
debate inside Lebanon. It's certainly a very sharp division. The government of President Joseph Aoun
and Prime Minister Najib Salam have declared that Hezbollah is now outlawed and must surrender its
weapons. And in an unprecedented move, the government is also asking for direct negotiations with
Israel on how to disarm Hezbollah. Hezbollah's leadership, including of course Secretary General
Naim Qassem and its parliamentary leader um Muhammad Raad, in the last few days have uh issued very
strong statements

rejecting this and insisting on the right to resist and saying, "You know, if the army can't or
won't defend us, people have the right to defend their land against occupation." This looks like,
you know, this division has has been there in Lebanon, but this seems like an unprecedented rupture,
almost like a a point of no return. Talk about what's happening politically, uh your view of the
government's moves, and give us some more about how people are reacting. You just talked a bit about
what people are telling you, but give us more insight into this uh development. So, the political
maneuvers by the government, namely Joseph Aoun and Prime Minister Najib Like you said, they've
declared Hezbollah illegal and and they want to openly We've known they're they're negotiating
through what's called the mechanism under the table with indirect and sometimes maybe even direct
talks. It's a bit shady there, but um this reveals that there

is a fracture within the state apparatus and the tensions inherent in in Lebanon that continue to
exist under the shadow of imperial design. So there's no ambiguity here. Hezbollah weapons are not
an instrument of political contestation. They're a shield. They're the only defense that we have.
That's it. The Lebanese army, they set up their tents all across the southern Lebanese villages and
what happened? They pulled out. The government told them to leave. So what are we supposed to do?
The government's saying we're not going to protect you. The Lebanese army is not going to protect
us. So again, the only shield we have is Hezbollah and Hezbollah is the tangible expression of our
right to resist occupation and to defend our people against a history of foreign aggression that
stretches back before the time of during the time of Shaban Aman when Lebanese people were resisting
alongside Palestinians. And and as you mentioned, Sheikh Naim

Qassem and a parliamentary leader Muhammad Raad have consistently affirmed that the resistance is a
national duty and a moral imperative, one that can't be disarmed at you know, the behest of those
who would leave Lebanon exposed and vulnerable. They're the Lebanese state is begging to have this
be over and done with while also not giving us any guarantees that will be safe because as we've
seen before to this current situation, they killed over 350 people. I I was making a list of their
names every day. So demand that we surrender in the midst of a war is to ask us to abandon the
principles of self-determination that define our history and then to accept this logic of
submission. And and you the thing that we have "Hayhat minna dhilla" is we I would rather die than
face this humiliation. So every missile Hezbollah launches, every defensive action that they take is
an assertion that Lebanon

is not a colony and that our people are not subject to anyone, whether that be the what this Mahmoud
Abbasian state that we have, um, and that our resistance is rooted in the consciousness of
oppression and the pursuit of liberation. Sheikh Naim Qassem said, "That's it. We're not going to
give up our weapons. We're warning you that we can only tolerate so much." So, what do they expect
us to do? So, this is a continuation of a struggle that's both ethical and existential to us. And
so, to disarm under these conditions would be to erase the memory of all those who have resisted
before us and to hand our people the inheritance of subjugation, and we refuse. Ruqaya, we have just
a couple of minutes, but, you know, you're listening to you describe the situation in Lebanon, where
you have this division between resistance and essentially collaborators. We see that also in
Palestine. You mentioned

Mahmoud Abbas, the head of the Palestinian Authority, which collaborates openly with Israel and
considers the resistance to be criminal. We also see it on a regional level now, as the United
States and Israel are waging this war of aggression against Iran and are being backed by, uh, Arab
states in the region by quite a number. Put what's happening in Lebanon in the regional context. How
do you see what's happening with Iran? Is this now Is this an inevitable battle or war that that has
been building up for a while, or is it another episode in this series of start-stop, uh, escalations
that we've been all living with for so long? What are your thoughts on the the war with Iran? I I
think this is part of an ongoing battle that the resistance has been preparing for in the long run
and what we're seeing with the attacks on Dubai, the attacks on Bahrain, Kuwait,

a lot of people on the outside are wondering why Iran is targeting these areas, but they're these
are vassal states that have I had to how do I put this? That have been taking advantage of the
bloodshed in the region that have been benefiting and profiting off of the bloodshed in the region
and they've been watching as our communities are torn apart for not just in Lebanon, but in Gaza and
in wider Palestine. They've been watching and they've been benefiting from it financially. So this,
in my opinion, was inevitable and it's much deserved. The the Gulf regimes deserve what is happening
to them because they have refused to be anything less anything more than at the the behest of the
United States and Iran has basically put a price on it. They've said, "Okay, you want to be a vassal
state, you want to hold these US interests, you want to have these bases, we're

going to extract as much pain from what you are doing because this is I I It sounds harsh to a lot
of people, but I this is much deserved and we've been waiting to watch Dubai burn after everything
that they've done to us and and to Sudan, by the way. So I think that if Iran, in my opinion, they
will come out triumphant. This will put an end to a lot of the bloodshed that we've been enduring
for decades. Mhm. And just to say, of course, that uh you know, none of us want to see uh people who
are uninvolved hurt or injured in any country. That's not what we want, but we're speaking, of
course, in terms of the regional and and geopolitics. Absolutely. These are colonies. These are
These are people that have um basically made sure that they will pocket as much money from what's
happening. And they thought that having a

US base in their country would keep them safe. And Iran has blasted through that mythology. Mhm.
Roxane, for for people who you know, have been uh not grasping the enormity of uh this existential,
you know, war. Uh really for um you know, the Palestinians, for Lebanese, for Iranians, for uh you
know, for for people who are resisting you know, that that not just the tip of the spear that is
that is Israel of of the Western imperial project, but the US um which is of course the spear
itself. Um talk about how uh important Iran has been um in terms of supporting the Lebanese
resistance. Um and and and and what would happen uh if if the US and Israel were to, you know, um uh
enact this sort of greater Israel project across the region and try and um and and turn Iran into
yet another, you know, Western vassal state. Uh how important

is Iran to Lebanon right now? It's incredibly important because it's the final frontier in this
battle against Israel and the United States. And without, you know, Iran, not only would the
Lebanese resistance, Hezbollah, Hamas, and Islamic Jihad even, um but a lot of Palestinian groups
who have benefited from financial, political support from Iran, they would it would undermine
everything that has been happening for the for the last however many decades that Iran has been
supporting the Palestinian people and the Lebanese people because again in Lebanon the the Lebanese
army is not even allowed to use the weapons that they have which are hold to target Israel. That's
actually written in in the the agreement that our state has with the lovely Americans. So what do we
have? We have Hezbollah. That's what we have and the Palestinians have Hamas and they have the PFLP
and they have numerous other resistance groups that have been supported

by Iran. Iran has not benefited from supporting the Palestinians or the Lebanese people. It's the
total opposite. The more that they supported us, the more pain that the US has inflicted on them by
way of sanctions and now by way of killing over 1,300 people many of them children. So if we lose
Iran, it will be more devastating than losing Syria which is now under the government of former Al-
Qaeda leader Julani. So if if Iran falls, the region falls and this is not an exaggeration. Roqaya
Yeah. Oh, go ahead Ali. Yeah, the the stakes couldn't be higher and we're so grateful to you for
your reporting and we pray for your safety and the safety of everyone in Lebanon and we hope you'll
come back on and for people who want to follow your reporting, what are the best ways for them to do
that? You can follow me on Twitter. I'm you can search

the r o q c h a m s on Twitter. I'm also working at the cradle and I've been posting live updates
here and there on the situation. So I Twitter is probably the best place that you can find me. And
of course delete your account with Keanu Aliyev. >> Aliyev. That's the that's the podcast delete
your account. It's a really great in-depth discussion not to to missed and you are keeping
incredibly busy and doing tremendously important reporting that we are not getting from too many
places right now in Lebanon. And you're doing it while you're displaced and suffering all of the
same um you know, the the same difficulties that that so many people in Lebanon are facing and you
are still keeping this up. We're so grateful to you, Rokayya. Please stay safe as you can and thank
you so much for joining us today. No, thank you all so much and I

can't wait to come back on. Inshallah, next time all of our our villages will be liberated when I
come back on. Exactly. Thank you, Rokayya. Uh such an intense and um and incredible report from
Rokayya there. Yeah. Yeah. And just a couple of quick updates, a few hours after we recorded that
interview with Rokayya last night, Israel carried out a double tap tap strike at the Ramlet el-Baida
beach in Beirut where many displaced people were sleeping in tents. This video is from The Cradle,
which of course is the outlet that Rokayya also reports for. Witnesses in Ramlet el-Baida say they
were sleeping in their tents when the roar of the jets woke them. Al Jazeera's correspondent Heidi
Pet reported from Beirut. There was one impact and they popped their heads out of their tents in
time to see the second one, she said. At least eight people were killed and another 31 injured,
according to

Lebanese authorities. Israeli attacks also killed several more people in other parts of Lebanon
overnight and those attacks appear to be intensifying in the last few hours. There's also been a
potentially significant move against the US-backed Lebanese government's moves to try to use the
Lebanese army to forcibly disarm Hezbollah. The newspaper Al-Akhbar is reporting today that there is
a strong pushback from senior officers that has forced the government to shelve any such plan for
now. At the same time, a number of officers calling themselves patriotic officers put out a
statement warning against any plan to to use the army to confront the Lebanese public or internal
political forces. In the statement, the officers say, "Placing the army in confrontation with the
sons of the nation or assigning it the task of pursuing those who are confronting an external attack
on the country constitutes a dangerous precedent that carries grave risks for the cohesion of the
military

institution and for national stability." So, that's just some updates since we talked. >> just in
the last, you know, 20 hours since we talked to Rania.
