Title: Iran war widens, Hizballah steps up strikes, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-03-19
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUSGv5kpKFw
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: earlier context

So you are watching and listening to the electronic inifat. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day 895 of Israel's genocide, day 20 of the USIsraeli war on Iran. Um I am reporting this
on the afternoon of Thursday, March 19th. Things are changing quickly, but this the this coverage of
the third week of the war will never change. Um so uh you're going to hear from the IRGC and the
Iranian army. We're going to hear from the Iraqi resistance and Hzbollah. So stay tuned for that.
But let's start as always with the maps of the region so people can get our grounding here. We're
seeing uh the first map of the US bases in the region that have been uh targeted particularly
Bahrain, Kuwait, um Qatar, the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Mouafa Kaltti in Jordan, and then of course all
across Israel um the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps

um have said that they are dividing their operations about 40 to 60 um uh 40% to Israel, 60% to
high-V value targets in US positions throughout uh the Gulf region. So far, the US uh has said that
they've struck 7,800 targets in Iran. The IDF says 7,500 bombs dropped. The IRGC has fired more than
a thousand missiles, more than 3,000 drones, and Hzbollah and the Iraqi resistance have together
carried out more than a thousand operations. 1,300 people have been killed in Iran, 20,000 injured.
Um uh about a dozen in Israel have been killed and 12 more um across the entire Gulf region for all
of these operations by the Iranians. Um so again the uh massacre quotient is wildly um
disproportionate to the Israelis and the Americans as always. Um let's take a look at the next
slide. We will see um these attacks grow each circle. Uh the larger the circle the more number

of attacks and you can see this covers up to March 13th from the beginning of the war. So you really
can see uh all the targeting uh of the groups. The red dots are Iranian. Um the black dots are the
Iraqi resistance. Um the beige is Israel and the gray in the south of Iran is the United States. Um
and as I said those bases across the region have been targeted. high-V value targets has been Iran's
strategy knocking out uh radar systems um upon which the aerial defense array is dependent um and
preparing for a long war. they have been um uh targeting these high-V value targets early in the
war. That will make the later stages of the war a lot more difficult for uh the US uh and Israel to
defend. And the Gulf states are already weigh in over their head uh trying to defend their territory
uh from uh their US

bases and installations in their territories. and increasingly today, although Alli will talk more
about that uh after targeting uh oil infrastructure and uh gas infrastructure after the targeting uh
by Israel of the South Pars gas field last night. Um we could see the next slide, the straight of
Hormuz. This is of course the main choke point that we're looking at. We're looking at a map here
from the International Space Station um which shows that choke point. The north is the uh Iranian
coast all the way across. Um you can see it's very tight into their territorial waters. Um Goldman
Sachs was talking the other day uh their energy um their energy speaker was talking about the
disruption of the global supply chain that even if the war ended today which it surely is not um
that the whole system um the supply chain globally is um is really breaking because we have ships
that are

um stacked up on either side um of the straight of Hormuz 20% of uh oil of the world's oil goes
through there. 20% of the world's uh na natural gas also significant fertilizer uh going through
there. And because the ships are all stacked up there, um they're not going back to their ports.
They're not um they're all in the wrong place. Um so, um the straight of Hormuz is 18 million
barrels a day pass through there under normal times. out of the 100 mil 100 100 million daily
barrels uh um in the world 20% um 20% of the global oil supply is effectively offline although as
we'll see in a bit um Iran is still um exporting oil through um and their allies are as well. We
could take a look at the next map and you can see the transits uh of the ships through um the
straight of Hormuz starting from the day

before the war started um up until uh uh several days ago and you could see that it just basically
completely stops. You can see some Iranian vessels going through clearly. Um you see a lot of GPS
jamming when you're looking at this as well which is why the ships are disappearing. But it gives
you a good sense uh of the way in which the um global oil supply has been choked off by uh strategic
plan by Iran. Um so far have not had to mine um the uh corridor through the straits of Hormuz, but
there was uh some talk and some fear about that for uh the US. But the real issue here is I'm going
to uh summarize this by um an article that was in GC Captain which is a maritime news service uh
heavily military focused. Um the problem with the escorts uh creating an escort to get uh US ships
through

uh the straight of Hormuz is just something simply that the United States cannot do. They do not
have the capacity. They have 74 destroyers, guided missile destroyers in total. um one-third are in
maintenance, 24 left for the uh entire planet. The carrier strike groups um they rely on several
each as escort and protection. Um so you're down to uh about a dozen um left over from that. Um also
they're slow. It'll take a long time to mobilize to get them into the region. Um, and of course
Trump uh spat on all his allies before then begging them for um to come to to the uh escort
operation in the straight of Hormuz. Each destroyer that would come would carry 96 vertical launch
missiles, but they aren't all air defense. About a third are tomahawks or third are anti-ubmarine
and a third are anti-air. That leaves 32 air defense missiles per ship. When those run out,

the ship has to sail to port to reload. The Navy eliminated most of the at sea missile reload
capability. So the roundtrip transit reload and return can take weeks. Uh in this particular
situation they would be doing it uh at Diego Garcia. But in the Red Sea example from last year uh it
took 3 weeks to reload um the missile uh guided missile destroyers of their anti-aircraft uh uh
missiles. So it's just something that it's impossible to do. Let's look at the next slide. You can
see um uh the straight of Hormuz. Again, a satellite image. Trump said that he needed mind sweepers,
but it was reported in the days before the war began that the US pulled out several mind sweepers
that were already in the region. Um to give you a sense of how little prepared they seemingly were
for this massive uh war that has taken place. If we look at number

six, we can see an attack on a vessel. Um, this is an American flagged vessel hit by uh two
explosive laden unmanned boats uh off the uh coast of Iraq here. Um, this has been one of 16 um
vessels that have been targeted um along this and the IRGC Navy spelled it out clearly. They said
vessels in the strait must understand that this insecurity is the result of US and Israeli
aggression and they must expect wartime conditions for them and their allies in the straight of
Hormuz. So wartime conditions are to be expected uh in this area and that has effectively shut the
straight of Hormuz to um US and allied transits. We can see in this next slide from the Wall Street
Journal that that has not uh impacted uh Iran. We're looking at a headline from the Wall Street
Journal this week that says Iran's control of Hormuz means it is exporting more

oil today than before the war. Their currency has increased as well. Iran has apparently allowed um
some Chinese vessels to pass through and apparently last week a couple of uh Indian LG tankers. Um
but they are not allowing allies of the US or Israel to pass through there. Um there was a recording
played by the Wall Street Journal that showed um that had on board with Chinese tankers and they uh
radioed that they are friendly and the Iranian Navy allowed them to pass. Um so still the Iranians
are still exporting their oil. And I want to give you in this next one, there's going to be audio in
it, but I want to just, this video came out this week from a dash cam from a car um who was beside
uh an Israeli strike in uh Hamadan in the western area of Iran. And we're going to go to that now.
So that was

an attack on uh a nearby position and you can just see from inside that car first of all the dignity
and a plum that uh that the driver handled that uh pretty tense situation with. But just give you an
idea uh of what it's like to drive down a street uh in Iran uh at any point uh over this uh these
last 20 days. Um 36 ambulance uh stations have been uh damaged or destroyed. Six hospital units uh
completely out of service. Um and 18 healthc care frontline uh paramedics have been killed. Of
course, we're seeing that in uh Lebanon as well. And Iran said this week that 43,000 non-military
locations uh have been damaged or destroyed so far in the first 20 days of this war. We can look at
number nine here. We talked about this before the war um about uh how the United States was setting
up its positions at these

bases. They consolidated them. We talked about that um with Moafak Alsi in Jordan where there was
too many planes. uh the the entire tarmac um area was full of planes and essentially what the US is
doing is concentrating its air defenses around a few key places. Um this is the Prince Sultan uh air
base in Saudi Arabia and Mufa Kal Salty in Jordan has the same kind of thing. Um they have
concentrated their air defenses and this is satellite image from Mazar Vision uh from China. But uh
I meant to read read this out last week when we were doing uh looking at satellite mapping because
uh the satellite company Planet where most uh of the western open source intelligence mapping comes
from they put out a statement last week that said as part of Planet's commitment to responsible data
practices and the safety of personnel on the ground we are implementing temporary adjustments to

imagery across the designated area of interest across the Middle East. All new imagery collected
over the Gulf States uh Iraq, Kuwait, uh and adjacent conflict zones will be subject to a mandatory
96-hour delay before it is available in our archive. This change applies to both high and medium
resolution data. This measure is intended to prevent adversarial actors from using recent data uh
for immediate battle damage assessment and is rooted in our commitment to ensuring the safety of
allied NATO partner personnel and civilians on the ground. So pretty remarkable stepping uh falling
into line of uh an American satellite company um that has made it so the battle damage assessments
that we saw in the first couple weeks uh haven't been happening. But um if we look at the next uh
the next slide, we can see that these tankers, those are um that we saw on the previous slide, those
are KC 135 aerial refueling

tankers, and they were all uh globbed together on the tarmac. In this Wall Street Journal story, um,
five Air Force refueling planes hit in an Iranian strike on Saudi Arabia. Five US Air Force refuel
refueling planes were struck and damaged on the ground at Prince Sultan Air Base in Saudi Arabia,
according to two US officials. That is the risk of concentrating your assets all in one area, which
we uh foreshadowed on the uh pre-war buildup show um four weeks ago's show. Now um so you can see
that there the KC31 135 Strato tanker these are refueling aircraft that refuel the fighter jets in
the air. It allows them to extend their range. It allows them to stay up in the air on their bombing
sorties. They're critical part of the uh overall uh asset infrastructure that the US are using for
this war. Um, and you'll see on the next slide, we saw this week

two of these planes apparently collide in the air. This is a statement from the United States
Central Command about the loss of a KC135 over Iraq, which it describes as friendly territory,
although we're going to watch a lot of Iraqi resistance videos uh that would suggest otherwise. Um,
one of the planes crashed, lost uh all six of the crew um on board and that put uh in the second, if
we look at the next slide, you can see the second plane managed to uh limp into Bengurian airport
where the US uh also uh has been using uh a civilian airport um for its military assets. And again,
I showed you that in the prelude uh to the war uh episode that we did um that we saw dozens of these
refuelers in um in Bengurian airport. Um and you can see on the uh tail there that it's broken and
you can see it even

closer there. Um some of the KC 135 pilots were talking about how near a miss that um that tail
rudder being broken would be for landing and how close it was to losing two planes. So they uh
Americans have said that it was uh it was over friendly airspace. It was not friendly fire.
Supposition that the Americans are putting forward is that the planes collided. What we don't know
and what we do know from Yemen is that uh incoming fire has made uh fighter jets and aircraft
carriers um change their course uh rapidly drastic change of course um that could have led to this
uh accident as well. But so far all we know um is from the Americans and we'll see if they uh tell
us the full story about this. But now because of the five on the tarmac in Saudi Arabia and the two
more here in Bengurian, seven critically important uh

strategic assets are out of the battle here. Uh now are we on 13? Is this Yes, this is 13. Okay. So
let's uh move to um Iran just to say more than 200 American soldiers have been wounded. That is the
number that uh the Americans are going with at this point right now. But again really dragging their
feet on civilian or on uh casualty numbers coming out from the United States and also from Israel uh
unsurprisingly. So let's move to Iran's response. We are looking here on the screen at the main
weapons that Iran uses. The Shahed 136 drone has been wreaking havoc across the region. Um and then
their ballistic missile collection which puts them as one of the world's uh top missile uh
countries. Those have been used that we're seeing here the IMAD, the FATA which is um which travels
at hypersonic speeds and the Kore which is um has a two-tonon

warhead or also a um submunitions warhead and you're going to see those uh launch in the coming
slides on the next um the next slide number 15 here. You're going to see uh again the sort of sizing
uh comparisons of each of these families of weapons that the Iranians have been firing consistently
uh throughout uh this battle. Um although what you'll hear from the Americans and from the Israelis
is that 90% drop in drones and missile uh firing from day one. But that's not how you evaluate a
war. First of all, day one is of the war is generally a shock and awe type uh um approach. Um which
means you use much more on the first day than you would in the days to follow. Um but it's also not
Iran's strategy to just dump their missile stocks. They are planning for a long war, a war of
attrition, a war that once it

ends, they still need to be in um in in still have the ability to defend themselves. Um and so they
have been striking high-V value targets, advanced radars, um militaryindustrial uh base of Israel,
targeting US bases that have basically destroyed most of these bases. Um and that has been what
their strategic aim has been. So the Americans uh prattling on about uh how there's 90% less
missiles from the first day is mostly a statement about how many missiles there were on the first
day, not a a drop in the missiles. the missiles have been steady. Um the Israelis talk about um
consistently talk about eight and nine um missile uh attacks each day sending people to the shelters
up and down Israel. Um so just to talk about that 90% number and then Trump says 100%. So we won't
even bother with with that. Um let's look at the next slide and you can see

uh here's the launches. Um each of these this launch is the 54th wave. We're now up uh I believe the
64th wave was today. Um but you can see the launch of the GDD. There's the FATA hypersonic uh
travels at Mach 16. Has a uh maneuverable re-entry vehicle. Makes it a survivable and accurate
missile. This is the Kaibar Shaan family of missiles that people may remember are what the Ansarah
movement used. Uh they call theirs the Palestine 2. Um and we saw that being used to target Israel.
For their part, Ansar Allah has stayed uh on the sidelines of this battle. They have the ability to
really choke uh the international um economy if they were to shut down the Red Sea and the uh Suez
Canal. Uh this is an IMAD that you're seeing going up now. Liquid fuel. You can see the liquid fuel
launchers um have more of the red flame. This

is the Sajil. This was the debut of the Sajil in this um this is the one of the more advanced uh and
newest of Iran's um the IRGC aerospace uh force missile production. This was released first in 2023.
Um and uh after this I'll give you a better uh a shot of that missile. It's a multi-stage missile
thousand kilogram warhead. If we see it on the next slide there you can see the multi-stages um
which allow it to a greater survivability through each of the stages. The boost stage u the
midcourse flight stage and then the terminal stage. Um each stage uh is controlled on that multi-
stage missile which makes a problem for uh missile defense. Um so a sophisticated missile that we're
seeing there. Um let's look at number 18. This is the 58th wave. You're going to see the GDD series
uh here being launched. You get a good view of that one.

Um and the Gdder carries a one- ton warhead. It's also the one that they have had a submunitions
warhead. The garter has about 20. We've seen somewhere between a dozen and 20 submunitions released
from the garter over uh the skies of Israel is where we really see it. Um, of course, these missiles
are also there's the FATA again. You can see the difference in the solid fuel launch uh there. And
again, so Israel saying that these are happening all throughout the day. Um, and in the next slide,
we are going to have uh sirens. You're going to see the God arriving in Israel coming up. So, heads
up for the sirens. And you can see that they break apart um and they force the Iron Dome and David
Sling the lower level um interceptors to try to find to try to hit those um of course depleting
their air defense um while also uh striking

a a wide range. You can see there there's about 20 uh in that gdder uh clip. The next one we can see
the launch of the Kuramshar 4 um at night. Um this is again the two uh ton warhead um carried on it.
And this is the one that has sometimes cluster um submunitions in it that are released way up in the
atmosphere and spread out over a wide distance. So not a bomb and not really effectively described
as a cluster munition. Although um while thousands of people die in Iran and Lebanon, Amnesty
International wants us to call that a cluster bomb um which it is clearly not. Um if we could take a
look at the next one, you'll see uh the Korecoming um with audio or no there's no audio in this.
This was taken actually interestingly by um a leading member of Israel's aerrol a air air defense uh
array uh a

retired officer and he uh recorded this off of his roof. Didn't seem like he was so concerned about
the uh censorship, but that gives you a good uh a good view of uh the 80 submunitions that are in
the uh Karamsh 4. also a new uh missile. You can see it there as a pretty good shot of it. If for
people not watching, you're just watching streaks in the sky uh separated by a great distance by
this point. Um and working effectively and we've seen that a number of times. In this next slide,
this is interesting because NBC took this footage. It's crisp footage. Um the audio is in but they
this is from the first day but they only released it um they only released it this week despite it
being from the first day. So they are obviously following uh censorship laws um publishing this
late. Let's take a look at this number

22. And so these are the strikes we did see on the opening day of the war um hitting Tel Aviv. We
saw that in True Promise 3 hitting Tel Aviv, but we really haven't seen a lot of that in this um in
this stage of the battle. The um civilian targets are have not been the um objective of the
Iranians. They are trying to keep the it seems to keep the escalation ladder um to keep the
escalation in place to not climb the escalation ladder. Um because right now um I think from Iran's
point of view, they believe that they're winning this war. They have the global economy um by the
throat. Um they have the American bases in the region in a very uh uncertain future. Um and they are
they have been saving their missiles uh especially their advanced missiles for um the period after
um the targeting of these radars that we

have seen in every uh Gulf state all around. Um so high value targets and a battle of attrition. So
and I think that matches with what we're going to see in the visuals um throughout this number 24.
You can see them targeting Natim air base which is a key uh sorry this is a strike on a road outside
of Jerusalem where you can see the impact of the warhead um when they're not um submunitions. That's
a direct um that's a direct strike on the road outside of Jerusalem. You can see the massive crater
that we're looking at. This is a photo from Reuters. Um, even seeing these kind of photos are rare
through the censorship and they're always a number of days uh delayed. So now let's look at 24. You
could see the targeting of Natim uh air base. Um you can see this from a closed circuit camera that
we're seeing here. And

we know from the previous True Promise operations that you can see the bases being hit even though
they're out in the desert. Uh, Nvatim is south of Beersa in the Negab desert um and it has been a
target um in all three of uh the previous true promise operations. We can see the next slide uh as
well as you can see this incoming uh missile strike on uh the Vatim air base and um censorship does
prevent us from seeing what is happening and what is being hit on those air bases which are
regularly being targeted. You can see that in the um field reports by the IRGC um about those
targets. Um let's take a look at number 26. You can see the two here main air defense systems. The
THAAD system. We know the radar was knocked out. It's key advanced uh early warning radar was
knocked out. Half a um half a billion

dollar uh radar knocked out. You could see that um this is from Reuters, an infographic from
Reuters. Um, the Patriot system is firing $4 million interceptors. And we saw yesterday in the UAE
uh one of those um appear to uh misfire and dumped its uh magazine of interceptors at nothing coming
in um expending um you tens of millions of dollars. The THAAD interceptors are $15 million. And
after uh all of these videos of Iranian launches, the uh Sentcom decide to put one out on there. So,
let's let's watch them try to copy what the uh Iranians do here. So, we're seeing the launch of the
THAD interceptors here. $15 million right there being sent up in the air. Uh a single interception.
Presumably, if they had more film on this, they would be showing us more of these. Um, there you see
a night THAD interceptor that's going to just head up into the sky.

Uh, it doesn't appear to be targeting anything. So, just in those uh 6 seconds, you watched $30
million uh be sent up into the sky. Um, number 28, Iran is still downing drones. Um, there's a
number of these videos that we could bring every single week. This is an MQ9 Reaper that was downed
over Bandar Abbas. Um the IRGC are apparently using their MadID air defense system um for these
takeouts and there the number that the Iranians claim is 120 drones between the Israelis and
Americans taken out. I don't know. Um, we haven't seen the numbers broken down uh specifically, but
we have for sure seen dozens uh on air and you've seen almost a dozen just on this show uh alone.
Um, let's take a look at number 29. There's going to be audio in this as um IRGC drones target uh US
bases. So those are that's at IRGC aerospace underneath it on

that first slide. And here you're seeing the Shahed 136 is being launched. And the black ones are
interesting because those are uh usually exported to Russia. Um so it's unclear. Uh it seems to be
suggesting that um Iran is using some of its export supplies uh as well, but what we haven't seen is
the more advanced drones. They're still firing uh the 136s um from the essentially from the old
stock and we're still now we're 20 days and 3,000 drones uh into this battle. And of course the same
targets here UAE, Bahrain, Kuwait and Moaf Salty in Jordan being targeted by these drones. Um and uh
again the Iran is a worldclass producer of these drones. They are cheap to produce 25 to 50 grand uh
at the most. Um, and they can be launched from particularly from anywhere as you see there being
launched off a road um there. Um, let's take a look

at number 30 because you can get a closeup here of the quad launcher that they're using, the
multiple launch uh drone system. Yeah. So, multi-launch drone system instead of a rocket system.
We've seen that. The canister launches. We've seen larger ones than that. We've seen shelves um that
have eight on the shelf um fired one after another. Um which is useful to fire multiple at a time
because it can be dangerous, could be tracked. Um, so the more you can get off, um, the better you
are. Number 31, it's not just the IRGC, is also the Iranian Army. These are Iranian Army drones
launching, uh, Artesh. This is Artesh, the Iranian Army launching Arash 2 drone swarms. Um, the
Arash has a 2,000 kilometer range. It's almost a hybrid cruise missile that can be uh steered um by
a man in the loop. It's 150 kilogram warhead. Um, and we've seen these be used a

lot by um, uh, long, these are long distance ones, but we've seen the shorter range ones uh, the
Hadid 110 um, used all over the Gulf to target bases. Um, now let's take a look at the Iraqi
resistance. They have got drone operations going on as well. Here we can see a firsterson quadcopter
drone. Um, this got a lot of attention this week because um the first person drone gives you a view
uh of the drone hitting um some kind of uh American uh position inside Camp Victory. This is their
uh Baghdad uh airport base. And you can see the the drone flying around. And these are the drones
that we see in um Ukraine and Russia. Um, and they show uh they would show if a soldier was there um
on camera before they were killed. And I guess there's some supposition that Americans will somehow
care more if they see um this quadcopter

hitting their troops than the much more capable Shahad drones and of course the ballistic missiles.
So it it this is a something that is new we're seeing for the first time in this battle. Um, but
it's not a qualitative edge over um the other weapons that have been used. Um, but the Iraqis have a
lot. Let's take a look at 33 here because we have a uh I stitched together a bunch of drone
operations here. We're looking at the Iraqi resistance in an underground uh launch station. You see
the fighters in their desert camo uh moving through tunnels uh in Iraq to get to these launching
sites. Um, there's a crew of about uh at least half a dozen that we're seeing here. And we're seeing
the uh Shahed 101 drones that are used by the Iraqis uh a lot. Um there's going to launched from a
protected underground position. Um there signs that they're

showing to show the date and the target and the targets are um usually in Iraq. Um there they're
pledging allegiance to the new supreme leader and saying that they are on the battlefield for him
with their drones and their rockets. Um and they're going to open the roof here of this sheltered
launch space uh and launch their drones. Now we're getting an overhead shot of it. So they're
putting in their uh resistance video. Uh they're up in their resistance video game for sure in uh
the Iraqi resistance that we're seeing here. the launch of the two drones from a safe uh particular
uh from a safe spot. This is the um there's a number of the Iraq Islamic resistance in Iraq is an
umbrella group. Um it has links that go back to Kasamsulammani and the uh Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps goods force training these forces during the war uh during the US occupation of

Iraq and the greater uh war on terror in the region. So, in a lot of ways, we're seeing come
together um fighting forces that were prepared by the same uh organizations fighting in this war.
The targets of of these operations, there's been more than 500 uh Iraqi resistance. There you're
seeing the embassy uh building in um Baghdad burning. Uh US bases in Kurdistan, 50 operations, 48 by
drones and two by missiles. This is just by one group, Guardians of the Blood Brigades. Um they've
targeted uh Camp Victory in Baghdad 21 times, 17 times by drones and four by missiles. Targets in
Syria, 11 operations, nine by drones. In Jordan, 13 operations all by drones. They've also targeted
Saudi Arabia, nine operations, all drones. And also Kuwait, six operations all by drones. So that's
one group. Um 110 operations just by this group over 15 days. Um, Al Jazer uh reported yesterday
that there's been more

than 3,000 missiles and drones fired at the Gulf States um including 2,000 at the UAE, Israel's
biggest ally in the Gulf States. Um so pretty significant uh scale of operations from the Iraqi
resistance that have been going on um throughout this battle. They joined the battle on the first
day and they're putting out 25 operations uh each day um day in and day out. Sometimes as many as uh
35 or 40. Let's take a look at 34. You can see um one of their targets. This is the um counter um
this is the counter um rockets uh artillery and mortars. CRAM uh radar targeted at um the US embassy
base in Baghdad. Um you can see that destroyed um trying to down a drone. It was a drone that hit
it. So it's made for rockets, artilleries, mortars, but it should be um the C drram because the D is
the drones and that has

been what has been destroying these radars across the region. And we get a view of it here because
in Baghdad you're in uh a downtown area whereas the uh the other targets of these radars are out in
the desert and we were getting the uh battle damage assessment from the satellite footage that we
are no longer getting. Um we can take a look at 35. You can see that the um radar here is completely
destroyed. Multi-million dollar uh radar uh being destroyed. um 36. You see, um there's audio in 36.
You're going to see the CRM. launching 20 mm launching 20 mm rounds. Uh just firing it out over the
city uh close in. Um that's the last line of defense is the CRAM. Um the radar being destroyed on it
surely makes it slower. Um but you can see also just the way that they're doing this, firing uh
effectively 20 millimeter bullets, rapid

fire into the city to try to shoot down uh one drone. Um the next one we can see uh the same thing.
37 is going to be um another view of the same operation from a couple nights ago. >> a direct target
on the base. So, one was hit by the uh by the CRAM and we saw that one crash land and blow up uh
just outside of the base and then that was a direct hit on the base. And if we look at 38 here, this
is interesting. This is footage showing um Bahrain being used for uh HIMAR launches, ballistic
missile launches by the US at Iran. Um a video verified by the New York Times shows the ballistic
missiles being launched from Bahrain in the direction of Iran and what appears to be the first
confirmed instance of an attack on the Islamic Republic originating from the Persian Gulf uh from a
Persian

Gulf country since the war began. using um using the country for offensive operations. This was
revealed by accident in a propaganda video by um by Sentcom. Um and so it's uh the the government of
Bahrain said that um that it has not participated in any offensive operations. We can see on the
right of this uh image that I'm showing you. On the left you can see the high Mars launcher um the
missile launcher and on the right you can see it launching um and so we clearly know that this is
being that this uh that Bahrain at least is being used for offensive operations. You can guess that
that they're not alone in that. Um, since the United States and Israel began um the war on Iran
earlier this month, um more than 100 missiles and 200 drones have been launched at Bahrain, mostly
concentrated on the United States fifth fleet, which is the naval

command for Sentcom and and one of its two crucial bases, three crucial bases in the region with
Aluade in Kuwait uh in Qatar and then the uh bases in Kuwait are also key. Um so that is the Iran
front. We are going to move now to Lebanon and take a look at uh operations in Lebanon. We can start
with the map. More than 1 million place displaced persons already in Lebanon approaching a thousand
killed, 2,200 wounded um including 38 uh healthcare and paramedic workers, 74 wounded among health
care workers. Um, we saw that uh rocket barrage along the border wounded uh uh Israeli finance
minister Bezel Smootrich's son. Uh that got a lot of attention, but the information is being held
tightly by uh Israel on this front as usual. Um but let's take a look at um uh Naim Cassam, the
chief of uh Hezbollah here uh releasing a video um with his fighters

in a tunnel. You're watching the fighters move through the tunnel and this is the speech from Shik
Naim Kasum from a couple of days ago. He says, "Let it be clear. The battle we are waging is the
battle of the resistance and the people of the resistance against the Israeli aggression on Lebanon.
We have taken on as resistance the lessons and morals of the previous battle. The enemy's threats do
not scare us and the enemy will see our strength. There is no such thing as defeat or surrender in
our dictionary. We will remain in the field regardless of the sacrifices. We will not retreat. This
is our country. We will not allow anyone to control its fate, its decisions, and how its people
live. He said, "This is an existential battle. We have prepared ourselves for a long confrontation.
The word now is for the field." So the word now uh as Hzbalah likes to

say as Nasalli used to say um watch the field now um we're beyond words and this is showing um
Hzbala's readiness for this battle that we will see uh over the coming minutes that have been um
impressive uh rate of operations by Hzbollah that exceed any of the previous rounds of battle um
after October 7th including the focus war um on Lebanon and Hezbollah at the end of 2024. So their
pace of operations is higher now. Hezbollah has carried out 426 operations as of yesterday and they
go round the clock when the day of their uh field reports ends. They loop back and they're already
uh they're already on um the new day. There's no uh no letup in uh Hezbollah operations. Um they've
had a high of 51 uh operations in a day, a high of 47. They're averaging 27 operations a day. The
2024 war, they average 22 operations. The IDF said 150

rockets a day uh are being fired. So um Hezbollah has rejoined the war in full force uh and full
capability which is something that if you listen to western uh defense analysts you were told uh was
impossible because they had been degraded. Not true. They are on the battlefield stronger than ever.
Let's take a look at number 41. We have seen now the uh reintroduction of the Almas um anti-tank top
attack anti-tank guided missile system. Here we're watching on we're on the missile for this view.
The camera is on the end of the missile and we're seeing it uh hone in on the uh on the tank uh on
the turret hatch of the tank uh direct hit on that tank. We've we're seeing several tanks hit each
day. Uh this is of course the clearest one. And to remind viewers that the Almas is a um reverse
engineered system that was an Israeli spike

system that Hezbollah captured in the 2006 war, moved to Iran, they reverse engineered it and made
the Almas and are now killing Israeli tanks with that weapon. Um the next one you can see is a
Cornet anti-tank missile strike. Again, we're seeing at pretty significant distances um which is
part of the geography of the area, but also puts lie to this idea that I Israel is invading. Um
Israel is moving to forward positions that they had already established. What you saw there on
screen was a massive burm with troops up on top of it. That was uh the Jabo Balat uh station. It's a
forward base. And there you can see with the uh you can see the the cornet strike again at
significant distance but a direct hit on what appears to be a tank uh on the edge of that base
there. Um that's one of five forward bases that Israel has set

up and and Hezbollah has been hammering those five bases that are set up. Um according to the
Israelis there's been more than 1100 strikes so far in Lebanon. Um and uh Israel believes that
there's a thousand Radwan uh special forces that are below the Latani River ready for that for the
battle. The Israelis have three divisions right now spread across uh the Lebanon border. Um the 36th
division is in the forward uh position on these bases. Um the 91st Galilee division is taking uh the
eastern sector and on the western sector is the reserve 146th division. Um so they are planning to
battle what they think are uh a thousand RAD one forces. Unclear uh how good their intelligence are
on that. Uh I would suspect not great. Um let's take a look at 43. There's also uh daily rocket
barges. As I said, 150 um rocket and missile attacks from um Lebanon each day,

some days more. This operation you're seeing here was 200 rocket barges. Um and Hezbollah has um
issued evacuation warnings to all residents of Kirat Shimmona are requested to evacuate immediately.
All residents of the town of Naharia are also uh requested to evacuate immediately and head south.
That was eight days uh before. There has been multiple times in those eight days that they have been
warned and then this operation came uh 8 days after that warning a 200 rocket barrage um from their
multiple launch rocket systems. And you can see um the fighters here launching those rockets. Um,
Hezbollah has brought cameras along on these operations a little bit more than uh we were seeing in
the last round. Um, but you can see the launch of these rockets. We saw on the show last week the
Iron Dome really struggling to handle these. One of the reasons for that is the early warning radars
have

been knocked out. Um, and so the early warning radars would give a more precise location to the
weaker radars and then those weaker radars can dial in on the small segment that they need to worry
about. When the early warning radar is out, that doesn't exist anymore. These radars are picking
them up late. They're not picking them up on an accurate trajectory and therefore makes it more
difficult to intercept. We're seeing that with the Iron Dome because it's down close to the ground
and you can see them missing. Um it's a little harder to tell if that's happening with the missiles
um that travel uh out of the atmosphere and return to the atmosphere, but um you can imagine that
the loss of these high-v value radars is having a significant impact uh on the radar um tracking
system that the entire air defense array is underpinned on. Just to put a further point on

that. So this was a 200 rocket barrage and we can see in the next slide what it looks like uh from
the Israeli side number 44. We took out the the audio track out of this one because the Israelis are
just so shocked at what's happening that they're making squealing noises that don't uh don't make
for good radio and television. But as you can see, um the Iron Dome is not intercepting uh these
rockets that we're seeing during this barrage. Um certainly not enough of them uh to uh to match the
false uh exaggerated interception rate that the Israelis like to tell people uh both to make their
equipment look sophisticated but also to uh so their population doesn't freak out. Um number 45.
Let's watch 45 because this is the launch uh of a of a FAT 110 ballistic missile. Um um you can see
Nasala there on the missile. It says essentially um

praising God for supplying this uh who gave this to us. We could not have done this alone. And there
you see the launcher. Blessings to you to the master of time, the Lord of Time. Uh and on the
launcher of this uh ballistic missile. Again, this is headed for the IDF's home front command
headquarters southeast of Tel Aviv. So, um, an accurate missile with a heavy warhead, 300 to 500 kg
warhead sent at a very strategic location with accuracy and from close distance, which makes it a
lot more difficult to intercept um than um when they're fired from Iran and have a trajectory more
established um for uh the air defense array. Uh the next one we see here 46 is a Fadi 6 versus
Gilot. And again, highv value targets. And this video is interesting because you can watch the
fighters out here at night. Uh in the audio track, you can hear the

the fighter jets buzzing overhead. Um but they're out here in the dark setting up their missile
launcher for the Fatty 6 barrage that's going to be targeting Mossad and Unit 8200 headquarters at
Gleote. There's a lot of dark uh on this video, but it's because the fighters are setting up out in
the open uh to launch this barrage uh and don't have lights on so that uh they're not spotted. Um
the Fatty 6 is a 302 mm rocket uh 225 km range with 150 kilo warhead. You can see there with the
lights the number of fighters they're going to truck launch um these uh heavier missiles. The 56 um
has a guidance kit that was added to the 302. Um, and the there's a number of Hezbollah additions
that they have made onto these to put precision guided kits on previously unguided rockets um to
effectively make them a missile and they're targeting uh much

more effective. The fighter at the end here is saying that um that they are committed to the
covenant, the covenant of Hezbollah. They are rooted in this land. We are defending its honorable
people. He says before he launches there, you get a good look of the truck launcher and the size of
the FOD uh six. It's a it's a large missile um that was part of this barrage. There's a whole uh
series of FODI missiles that have been improved and these are some of the things that are left over
from the last war because Israel uh told us that they had destroyed some uh untrue number percentage
of Hzbollah's missile um and rocket capability. But those numbers uh coming into the war were
believed to be in the tens and hundreds of thousands for each type of missile. their 122 mm grad
rockets. They had a 100,000 of them. Um so even if um some

percentage of them were knocked out, they still have significant capabilities. And that's what Naim
Kasam was talking about uh in that opening uh in his in his speech that we are ready for a long
fight. We are prepared for it. Um we have shifted with the lessons learned from the previous battle
and we are applying them uh on the ground in this battle. Um there you see the multiple launcher in
the corner there. Um and you can see the truck mounted uh truck launched um system there. And there
you see Nasallah um his supplication saying God you who when it matters most when matters become
most difficult you open the door for us that even imagination could not reach. Um so they had
Nasarallah and then Nasalla signed that. So that was his uh message from the Quran for his fighters
and they're using that at the base of the launcher. Again, something that we

have seen with all of these resistance groups linking these um to their fallen commanders um
recognizing their history and respecting it uh in the battle uh today uh as we have for the last
three years really. Let's look at number 47. Um, this is a drone unit. And this is this one is rare.
I'm trying to give you a cross-section of uh of Hezbollah videos. They released more than that this
week, but these are a good cross-section. And this is something we don't see much from Hezbollah.
This is a long single tracking shot um from the GoPro camera on the fighter's head. Um, that gives
you an idea of the battle space. Um, you can see the gorillas in the jungle here. Essentially,
you're talking about the bush, the forest, um the hilly forests of South Lebanon. Um you can see the
shelter it gives and they're launching Hasbah built uh Siad 107 drones here.

A drone swarm targeting um uh Israeli base separate, which is an armor and weapons production base.
Again, highv value targets hit with a drone swarm. This is from uh the 9th of March, although the
video was released this week. And you can see them setting up each of these uh SID 107 drones um
hooking up their guidance systems um launching them their rocket assisted launch um but also just
the landscape. And that's why when Israel says it's invading Lebanon, you need to look at this
surroundings. You need to see the bush, the trees, the mountains, what it means to invade um to
truly invade and not just tell your people uh in a press release that you're going um to fight um
because this is a very difficult battle space. And a video like this that we don't see very often.
Part of the reason we don't see it is because of the expanse of

this area. Um it's not like Gaza where they could have where they carry out the operations, they
have video of it, they send a runner um to get the video. Um here you have fighters in positions
spread out all across many many miles of the south. Um and the distance that they have between them
and um and the Israelis is also a significant distance which is why you see those um um anti-tank
guided missile strikes taking uh so long to get there and how good a shot it is to get it to cover
those multiple kilometers um more than five in some cases. Uh but that's why we don't get the same
type of videos as we get uh on the ground in Gaza and why we get videos uh often a week or more
later um because of the spread out nature of this battle. And you can see they're launching these um
from

full shelter of the bush in South Lebanon. They're also on the high ground uh in South Lebanon. And
so you can see there uh here the fighter says it's time to it's time to move out. So they launched
their dozen drones. Um and the still the same single shot. It's a interesting shot there. Uh let's
look at number 48. Another rocket barrage. Um this is against u the an Israeli base um in the upper
Galilee. Um and this is one of 98 operations that Hezbollah carried out in the 72 hours around this.
Um, so they're carrying out a tempo, as I said, that's greater than we had seen in previous battles.
Um, uh, and it's significant that they are getting us these videos over this large space. You can
see them, uh, controlling their controller there. Um and there you see them saluting their um fallen
leaders Hisham Safhadin Nasallah. Uh Safedadin was assassinated after

Nasraa and Naim Kasam who is the uh secretary general of Hezbollah today. So all three of those on
um the launcher of this barrage. And again, as Hezbollah likes to do, they show you uh settler
camera footage of the strikes. Um uh in Zatim, which is just north of Safed. Um in 49, we see a
cruise missile. So, this is the first we have seen uh in this round of the launch of a cruise
missile. You can see the turbo jet on the top there. We're seeing a picture of Nasala again um in
this shed. Um, and you're going to see um written on the wall um a verse from the Quran that says um
to prepare against them whatever force you can. Um so again uh strong messaging, tight messaging. Um
as ever um Fabian Hintz from the International Institute for Strategic Studies noted that on that
Pava cruise missile, an Iranian cruise missile

um that he noticed um jamming resistance uh CP antenna for satellite navigation um on that. So even
more difficult to bring down. Um and one final operation uh a rocket barrage versus Naharia. Again,
Nahar is on the northernmost uh west coast of Israel. Um this is a swarm of Sed 107 drones built by
Hezbollah and 122 mm GRAD rockets um targeting the uh coastal city. Again, they were given
evacuation warnings um as uh early as the 8th of March to evacuate those uh communities that are
right along the border that Israel is using as military bases um from which to strike uh Lebanon.
And so they matched uh Israel's evacuation warnings with warnings of their own. Um again, so this is
uh by the time you watch this video, Hezbollah will be 500 operations deep. Um they're carrying out
um in in the 30s basically uh operations every single day. Um and they said that

this battle is existential um and that they are prepared to be in the field for the um entire battle
as long as is necessary. um which maybe isn't quite the same language that we heard during the
October 7th um Lebanon front. Um so we'll have to keep our eyes peeled on that. That is the Lebanon
front. And this has been the resistance report for day 895 of Israel's genocide in Gaza and day 20
of the USIsraeli war with Iran.
