Title: Fierce resistance confronts Israel’s Lebanon invasion, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-04-16
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XTwK2PKBpGI
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: core weekly / user supplied

You are watching and listening to the electronic inifatada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day of Israel's genocide in Gaza, day 48 of the USIsraeli war against Iran, and day 45 of
Hezbollah's defense uh of South Lebanon. Let's take a look first at the Straight of Hormuz, and then
we'll get to Hezbollah's combat videos shortly. Just a a new view here for the Straight of Hormuz.
obviously the center of the uh world economy right now uh hanging on by a thread. The International
Monetary Fund said there would be a global recession. They described it as the biggest supply
disruption in world history. Uh and we're only just beginning it. Um there's a good shot on the
screen there of the area in question. And it also shows the depths uh of the water and just how
shallow the straight is. um how shallow the Gulf is. Um and at this current

point, the blockade went into effect, the US blockade went into effect uh on Sunday. Um ironically,
just before um the American blockade went into effect, more ships had exited the Gulf than at any
point since the war had begun. Um and so the US blockade um is attempting to snuff that out uh at
the expense of the world's oil uh gas um and then all the derivatives that come from those uh
petroleum products that are all basically made in the Gulf that you see there. Bahrain, Qatar, the
UAE, uh Kuwait, and of course Saudi Arabia. And the US is talking about interdicting ships. That's
the way that they're planning to do it. And they talked about some of that happening in Iranian
waters. We'll see about that. They have not been coming anywhere near Iranian waters. Um partially
because of um something Trump admitted to the other day that more than 110 missiles and drones

were fired at the USS Abraham Lincoln aircraft carrier uh which keeps it more than a thousand
kilometers um from Iran in the Arabian Sea. Um there is a second uh there's a third aircraft
carrier. The second aircraft carrier the um USS Gerald Ford is in dry dock in Europe and the um
George HW Bush is on route. We'll get to that in a moment. But this is Iran uh flexing a capability
that they have always had but they have not used um to control the straight of Hormuz which
overwhelmingly runs through Iranian waters. And as Iran has said, there are wartime conditions in
that strait ma namely the enemies that are attacking Iran um are not going to be able to travel. And
because of that, there's more than 3,200 ships stuck in uh the Gulf right now. We can look at the
next slide. You can see the blockade. Um you can see the

ships stacked up on either side. Those are the ships that are waiting to cross. The red ships are
waiting to cross. Um, but the ships that are just stuck in the Gulf are not uh lit up in this map
from Maritime Tracker. Um, as I said, 3,200 ships, that was as of March 18th, and we know that only
a small trickle have gotten out uh since then. Um we hear a lot about 20% of the oil, 20% of the
natural gas, but um it's significant what uh derivatives um are also go through the straight
including um helium, sulfur um and those are key. The helium supply is key in um medical um machines
and a lot of chip making. Um these are core um products that the world uses that are being broken in
the supply chain. Um and also some of the largest uh ports like the port in the UAE which is um

the Jebel Ali port is one of the busiest container terminals in the world. They are effectively shut
down. So the blockade that Trump has put in place, the people that it stands to hurt the most are
the Gulf countries, the Gulf allies of the United States, so-called allies who have been uh
definitely gotten short shrift in this uh war as allies. Um, of course, they've been uh hit pretty
hard. Um, and Iran threatens to hit their actual infrastructure um if this war escalates. Um, so
that map gives you a good sense. Let's take a look at the traffic scheme because this is the way
that Iran has um um asserted control over the strait. So the restricted area that they have created
um just off the coast of Oman there and the uh inbound and outbound traffic is passing through
Iranian water in between Keshum Island and Larak Island. um you can see there and

then outgoing traffic is on the um southern side of Larak Island as well. So they have moved the um
shipping corridors that were through that area uh into Iranian waters. Um and you can see it's such
a small amount of space, but also this map shows the depth of the water and you can see how quickly
along the shorelines um the water it's too shallow water for um for major ships. Um and so um this
is a significant development and it's very difficult to see how what the circumstances would be for
Iran to give up this asset, this capability that is it has asserted over the strait after um decades
of sanctions have crippled um growth in the country and forced it to be completely essentially self-
sufficient. Um, but also the key ships that are getting the oil from Iran are Chinese vessels. So,
are the Americans planning on stopping Chinese vessels uh in the

open water? So, that's uh obviously a major escalation should it happen? Um, it's very difficult to
tell by the Americans u what's bluster and what's not because a lot of it is bluster. Um, let's take
a look at the next uh map because you can see the overlay of the straight. There's Iranian
territorial waters. You can see those two um green lines there are the inbound and outbound.
Previously, we're looking at a map here of the straight zoomed in um with Iranian territorial waters
being shown here. Um and Iran and Oman's territorial waters overlap, but also anywhere through that
straight, you are right up against uh Iranian shoreline. And Trump has made a big uh thing about
destroying the Iranian Navy because he has no concept of what the Iranian Navy actually is. Um
sinking uh 70-year-old vessels that are tied up on the docks did not destroy Iran's Navy. Iran's
Navy is a a

fleet of thousands of fast boats. Um there are missile um missile-mounted fastboats that can um shut
down the straight in minutes with uh swarms uh on the warships that carry anti-ship cruise um and
anti-ship uh ballistic missiles. Um and so the uh that's the part of the navy that we haven't seen.
It's the part of the navy that is um underground largely in believed to be based on Iranian
television reports believed to be embedded in um the sharp mountain sides um the cliffsides along
the straight and of course the entire Persian Gulf um the northern side of the Persian Gulf is uh
Iranian uh coastal waters and the Iranian coast. So e any way of the Americans handling this if
they're going to do it with escorts um escorts are extremely cumbersome and difficult to run and
they only carry five or six ships at a time um compared to the 120 plus that normally

uh transited through this area on any given day. And each day that the strait is like this, it's
going to take more than a week to recover. And we're currently on day 48. So, we're already talking
about if the war ended today, the strait opened completely, there was a full um you know, peace deal
that allowed the Gulf to function as it was, you're a year away from fixing this. So, and every day
it gets worse as well along that um along that vector. So um this is really a global issue and Iran
uh flexing this capability uh using its geography flexing its geography um is something that we're
going to be watching um and people will be watching in countries all over the world because it's
going to affect everybody everything from fertilizer to jet fuel and everything in between. Now
let's take a look at what um Iran has done on the next

map. You can see this is overlaid. Salmer Kaglaniano overlaid this uh map which I think is really
helpful. Um this is the the inset that you see there is from the IGR IRGC Navy. They released this
um for mariners to understand the um traffic scheme and you can see it pretty clearly there going
between Kasham and Laric Islands um and the area in the middle there there was a there was
threatened to be uh mines. I don't think that it has been mined, but the threat is enough to stop
shipping because the main thing that is stopping shipping is insurance. Insurance companies do not
want to insure these vessels uh under this um circumstance right now. And we've seen that in the Red
Sea where they still don't sail through the Red Sea even uh two years removed from the um Ansurella
threat in the Red Sea. Um shipping has gone around Africa since then.

And so these are long-term uh impacts. The Americans say that there's 10,000 soldiers, 100 plus
fighter jets and surveillance aircraft uh over the strait guiding this. Not sure that's going to
help much. Um they say there's between 12 and 15 warships. Doesn't sound like enough for any kind of
serious blockade. Um but this US blockade is obviously uh illegal. Um you can't uh blockade and
selectively allow ships through. Um and that is what the US is doing. Um let's look at the next map
here. We can see what the US has done during the ceasefire and we can know that the Iranians are
doing the same thing. This is C17 heavy cargo plane traffic and this is a visual representation from
skyglass um that shows the routes and you know we call it uh uh figuratively a an airbridge of
weapons from the US to the Middle East. Um but this map shows it as

a bridge and and I think that's a useful way to see it. You can see from uh the continental United
States into bases in Europe um particularly in the UK. You can see that sharp uh drop in the UK um
and then into the Middle East. They're restocking their weaponry that have been depleted. And Iran
is doing the same thing. We could look at the next one is also a similar view of uh the same thing.
This is more of a global view. And this is just the C17s from the US to um to the Middle East. It's
not all flight. So you're just looking at cargo ship uh cargo uh aircraft the largest um cargo
aircraft in the world or second largest I guess after the uh Russian one but 520 plus individual
flights and that is the bare minimum because many don't have transponder traces for this traffic and
this is only as

of earlier this week. So the US is restocking but so is Iran. Iran uses this time to um dig out
missile silos that were buried. The Americans think that when they bury a missile silo that it's
gone, but it's not because there's a blast door at the end of the silo. You simply open the blast
door, you dig out the launch um silo and you continue to feed those various silos through railway
tracks underneath the ground and those are completely uh unimpacted. So the time uh is used by both
militaries um to prepare for the next stage of the battle. If we look at number eight here, you can
see um the USS Bush uh sailing. You can see it down at the bottom of Africa there. SCA u going
around the Cape of Good Hope. Um there was a lot of talk about that this was happening because the
bush might be afraid to

travel through the Red Sea. um which is possible although the Ford traveled through the Suez and
into the Red Sea before it had its um laundry fire in the Red Sea. Um but the I think that the
simple explanation is that when those ships are in the Suez Canal, they're completely trapped in the
canal. Um they could be attacked. Their uh GPS transponders are on. They're completely trackable.
Whereas when they're uh going overseas um they're less so. They could also train when they're on
their way over to deploy. Um, but still gives you a sense that they're willing more willing to spend
three extra days um to get to the theater um by traveling all the way around Africa, which is what
ships are doing now that previously used to travel through um the Suez and through the Red Sea. And
you can see that happening already with tanker traffic. tanker traffic is moving to

the US to fill up with um US crude at this point um right now. So there's some uh belief that
there's some benefit to the US to this blockade, but it's uh not true. It's not going to be at all
true and it's going to impact households all across the world, what we're dealing with right now and
going forward. So the US blockade um adds stupidity onto an already idiotic war that they have
launched uh against Iran. Uh let's look at the next slide here. You can see um I wanted to show you
this. These are the uh this is also bare minimum because we know that SenCom has been lying every
single day of this war um and hiding its casualties, hiding its physical casualties and hiding its
hardware casualties as well. But you could see this from the uh the war zone. They put together this
graphic of lost um acknowledged lost uh

aircraft assets. Dozens of Reaper drones. I think that's um again a light number. Um but still
they're talking about uh you know $30 million drones times dozens lost. You could see the four F uh
F-15E Strike Eagles. Three of them were shot down in Kuwait by friendly fire and the one that was
shot down by Iranian air defenses uh a couple weeks back, the uh the Awoks, the advanced uh early
warning and command aircraft, the E G the E3G centuries. And that second one, it says it's damaged.
We know that that one is damaged. So, um two one was completely destroyed and one at least one more
damaged on the runway. And then on the right hand side, that's from the uh so-called rescue
operation where they lost um two um cargo planes. They were HC130 cargo planes. They lost a pair of
those. They lost four um of their little birds and they lost

an A-10 Warthog that crash landed in Kuwait. And they also lost two uh combat search and rescue
versions of Blackhawk attack helicopters. And that shinook that you see there I showed you on last
week's show. Just wanted to uh keep the tally up about uh lost aircraft. We look on the next slide
here 9B. Um they also lost um the Navy's uh MQ4 Triton, which is a uh $240 million uh sea
surveillance drone. Um and one of only 20 that they have. This went down on April the 9th. um it
crashed uh and lo its transponder disappeared uh over the um over the straight just uh just outside
of the straight in the Gulf uh of Oman. But uh another significant loss for uh the US. Um let's look
at the next slide cuz the uh KC135s were also on that. These are the strategic air refueling planes.
And you can see this one pockm

marked like it got hit by um a shotgun. Um except the shotgun was a ballistic missile presumably. Um
and that's shrapnel hitting it from when it was on the runway. This is one of 10 that were lost. And
this is uh we can go to the next one because you can see it again on these. These are taken by uh
aviation photographers that are in the UK that um you know the hobbyists that are showing this this
these shots are by Andrew McKel McKelvie uh who is an aviation photographer and he got these shots.
These were um the planes that were uh hit on the runway at uh the Prince Sultan air base. So you can
see they had to patch it up and these are the ones that are flying. So, um, we can count probably,
uh, how many don't arrive back, uh, that were destroyed. Again, we're going completely off SENCOM.
All the

damage on US bases has all been kept secret. Um, but that will all come out there. It's impossible
to keep that secret. Um, with the number of soldiers that are deployed, um, it's just I I don't
believe that they're going to be able to hide these losses uh, permanently, but we will, um, we will
follow it. So that is the situation in the strait. Um let's move to Lebanon where we are covering uh
Israel's invasion of South Lebanon. Again you are watching and listening to the electronic inifat. I
am John Elmer and this is the resistance report uh Lebanon version here. Let's take a look at the
map. We have six currently six uh Israeli military divisions participating in this war that would
match the invasion of Gaza. But as I've been saying on this show for um years now, the complement of
a full division is not happening in the Israeli military because of

the reservists who don't report back. Um the numbers are not full complements. So they're not the
same number of troops that were in Gaza, but it is six divisions and six divisions fighting for 48
days in Lebanon um have not been able to move more than a few kilometers. Um the main battle right
now that is happening in uh apparently there's a ceasefire just before we went on air or believe it
when I see it. Um but uh Bintage Bale in the south in the central there um that you can see that is
um a long symbolic uh heart of the resistance in after the Israelis drove after the Israelis were
driven out of South Lebanon and literally ran away down the hill in the year 2000. Um and Nasalla
gave a speech uh in the stadium in Bintage Bale and he called uh the uh Israelis a spiderweb. Um and
that has been stuck

in the Israelis craw for a generation. Um and they wanted to go back in and take vintage bail. They
have been unable to do that uh at this point. fierce resistance um casualties on the Israeli side
again u sketchy casualty reporting from the Israelis but um dozens uh are wounded a day um in these
battles face-to-face battles these battles um the they take time because of operational security in
order to get the videos out so we haven't seen videos from the battle in Vintage Bale yet but we
will uh as the uh operational security allows calls for it. Again, Israel is carrying out um heinous
massacres in Lebanon, targeting civilians. Um Norah talked about it um uh and Raquaya Shamsadim
talked about it on our earlier report at the beginning uh about the massacre on Black Wednesday when
more than 300 people were killed in according to the Israeli Air Force a 60-second window of

time. Um they're killing paramedics um at a prodigious rate like they did in Gaza. And not just
paramedics from one particular agency being targeted, but all the different paramedics agencies,
including the Red Cross, are being targeted. Last night, um there was a quadruple tap uh massacre of
three sets of uh paramedics going to um another massacre. Uh more than 90 paramedics have been
killed. So even with the uh assistance of five forward bases that Israel established inside Lebanon
and six divisions all on the ground fighting um there is no sign that the Israelis are advancing
beyond even the first few kilometers from those uh points and you can see where Bentage Bale is uh
on this map. It's near the border. There's also heavy fighting up in the top of the Galilee
panhandle um in the Hoola Valley um and that's where the Israelis are trying to reach the Latani
River by um the shortest

possible distance and then they take pictures on the Latani and say we made it to the Latani. But
you can look at this map and see how far they are from actually doing that um on the eve of the
ceasefire which apparently is a 10-day ceasefire going into effect today. Um, all right. Let's take
a look at the first videos. Again, there's a little bit of a delay on these videos. So, we're
looking at videos uh right now from the um from the fourth week of the battle in uh late March. And
again, these FPV firsterson view drones where the pilot is um viewing through the video and we can
see what the pilot sees. Um and you can see this first operation here. This is in T Bay. This is in
the north of the just on the other side of the Galilee panhandle. And every one of these drone
shots, you could see

the destruction in Lebanon, which is Israel's primary military objective. They said they want to
turn um South Lebanon into Bethan. But look at the destruction there that you can see. We're looking
um I mean it's really remarkable views and that's why these FPV drones are so potent. There you can
see the Hummer coming up the hill. The the pilot spots it, circles around here, and he's going to
meet him as he comes up the road. Um remember that there's an anti-tank uh warhead attached to these
drones. I broke these drones down last week. So if you didn't catch last week's show, you should go
back and get it because um go back and watch. You can get that on the resistance report um playlist
on our YouTube channel. Um because the Hezbollah build is brilliant how they have done it. There you
go. direct hit on a Humvey with an anti-tank missile. Um that is

a devastating hit. We can see the next uh video as well. Um this is over on the coast number we're
on 14B over on the coast north of Nura. Um this operation came through uh on video yesterday. Um you
can see them marking their positions here and you can see the coast to the right. Um that is the
western coast. We're just north of Nakura. Um, and this is in Alba. Um, and the, uh, quadcopter here
is going to seek out a tank. There you see it in the bottom right hand corner encircled. And as
these pilots get better week in and week out, and there's another tank and an uh, an Nom troop
carrier there that is identifying. Previously, we had seen them dive right down onto that target.
Um, but the development of the uh operations has grown significantly just in the time that we've
been watching. Now, we're watching that drone from

a second camera. And you see how at the bottom of that drone, it's what it's carrying. It's carrying
an RPG warhead. Um, and so it's essentially carrying this RPG warhead right down onto the target.
Um, and the pilot sees through his uh headset how to do that. And we're watching it here from a
second camera. It's going to meet this tank and drop right now uh out of the sky and hit this tank.
You can see the tank uh you can see the strike on the tank there. And then the tank is going to put
up a smoke screen right here in order to try to hide its position thinking that it's a one-off
attack. But here we're going to move to the tank killer teams using anti-tank guided missile
strikes. Presumably this is a cornet strike because we don't see um the onboard camera that the
Almas would have. But there you're about to

see um the anti-tank missile hit that tank that was attempting to cover itself. Uh another direct
hit. So this is a complex ambush using FPV drones. This is civilian footage showing from uh probably
from Ty from Seur um just up the coast um from south of of there. And you can see um once they get
the Israeli troops moving to these targeted vehicles now you're going to see uh heavy rocket fire on
the position that they established. So complex operations being executed across all the fronts. This
is one of the fronts, the coastal front. Um there's two Israeli divisions moving up the coast here.
Um and this operation is in that area of operations. Um that's a pretty significant strike. Um we
can go to the next one is another FPV drone strike. This is now um on the eastern um battlefront
which is at the top of the Galilee panhandle in where Israel's uh

Kirat Shimmona is and this is a new Israeli base that they have established um for these operations
in South Lebanon in uh again in a civilian community as always. um using the civilians um as a human
shield and of course then any kind of damage or destruction in the town is considered um targeting
civilians. But we watch um through these videos and if we didn't have these videos we wouldn't be
able to prove these things that's showing the Israeli settlement and the new position there. Um
these these drones can travel tens of kilometers um you know at the farthest reach maybe 30 uh plus
kilometers but um well within range um in the 20 to 30 kilometers um and that's why we see the
distance traveled and I I left these videos um for the whole flight that they showed so you can see
them moving across the terrain. It gives you a really good

idea of what the battle space is like, how challenging it is. uh an area to fight in here. The drone
is coming down on the base. You can see their cars. You can see the Humvey. And if you look to the
left, you're going to see a soldier um just uh off to the side there. There you see him uh off to
the side of this Humvey that gets hit with an anti-tank missile, which would destroy that Humvey. Uh
unclear about that soldier. Um so that's another significant operation. Let's look at 16. Uh oh.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, let's look at 16. This is going to be a pair of anti-tank guided missile
strikes. That was just going to repeat in that previous video. Um, but I think we got a good view of
it. Um, there you can see the soldiers using houses again, occupying houses as soon as they come
across the border.

There's the anti-tank missile. You can watch it drop out of the sky and hit directly on that Israeli
troop position. Um, this is southwest of Bintage Bale. Um the Israelis are trying to move up towards
and surround Bintage Bale. Um but they're in a fierce battle uh with the resistance um in Bintage
Bale um to prevent that. Although that is not the resistance strategy. Um there's going to be a
second anti-tank strike here. The the video that we're watching, we're watching smoke uh billowing
from the first target. Um, and you're going to see uh movement of troops for the evacuation of the
wounded here. The Israelis have claimed hundreds of wounded. Um, but their casualty counts are as
sketchy as always. And you're going to see a second strike here uh on that same position. So complex
coordinated strikes all across the battle space from the furthest western point to the furthest
eastern point in

uh in Lebanon in south Lebanon. Um and Hezbollah is able to carry out these operations. They use the
red circle uh in the way that Kasam used the uh red triangle. So uh let's look at the next one.
We've got drone strikes on Israeli troop positions. And this is how you reach them. The Israelis um
are being reached by these drones, both the FPV quadcopters that we're calling drones. Um but these
drones are um the fixed wing drones, the SIAD 107s that they fire. Um and they are they don't make
as much noise. They have an electric propeller. Here we're watching the fighters entering the
location, the targeting data. And again, it's GPS targeting data. you can basically put what window
you want to put the drone into. Um, and it can hit. We're going to see here they're compressed air
launchers, which is also smart because it leaves a lighter um, uh, heat signature

from the launches. So, these fighters are we're looking at these fighters um, completely shrouded
uh, in the um, foliage in the bush um, in Lebanon here. um completely uh concealing the launch and
then uh aiming them at their targets u that are miles away. And that's the asset of these drones
that are built in Lebanon, built by Hezbala. Um of course sharing Iranian technology and insight,
but built in uh but built by Hezbollah. And you can see that they even made the drones camouflage.
So when you're mounting the drones, they hide within the trees. And there you see um the strike
there on an Israeli position. Uh again, you can see the evacuation of apparently wounded troops uh
which we're hearing about dozens a day. Uh but we haven't gotten full tallies in the same way that
um they hid those casualties during the war in Gaza. Let's look a look at take a look

at number 18 here. This is a stitch I made of a bunch of uh drone ops. um here targeting an IDF
barracks. You can see they put it on a map handy for us so we can see where they're targeting. And
again, look at just those two small rails. Um it's easy to move, easy to put into place. You can see
the camouflage there. They plug in the coordinates for the strike and they launch with the air
compressor and these are actually pretty safe operations to uh execute for the fighters and it has
made the drones a significant part of this stage of the battle. And again what I to repeat we are a
week behind um or or so in getting the battle videos. So, these operations are taking place when the
Israelis are at a distance um at a distance that they're not reachable through um through other
weapons. They're being hit with

these drone strikes. And as this is going on, I'll talk a little bit more about this um towards the
end, but rocket attacks are happening constantly during these operations. This is a stitch of three
separate operations that targeted u two three IDF bases and barracks uh in the north. Um and you can
see those operations are very difficult to find the launch site of Hzbollah carried out more than
230 drone operations of this style uh in the first month uh of the battle. So you know you're seeing
dozens of these a day. Um and they will continue because they will fire these drones on the rear
guard um of the Israelis which they do. They're constantly firing rockets and drones at the back
positions of Israeli troops that are mustering to come into uh into Lebanon. So, it's really a
multi- um a multifaceted resistance that's happening all across the territory and all across the

types of weapons um and units within Hzbollah. Here you can see a night launch. And again, that's
the air compressor. I've shown you guys lots of drone launches at night where you see the long red
um tail of the uh rocket boost. Um but the air compressor just leaves that little bit of uh friction
that you see. Um it's more it's not a flame so much as it is the friction of the launch from the uh
metal railings. Um, so that's these are these are all Hezbollah built this and they have presumably
um as many of them as they need for this battle. Um, because we didn't see them used that much in
the first um in the first major battle in 23 and 24. Although there were a couple of uh very high-
profile operations, including putting two of these SID 107s into the Golani Brigade base uh while
they were uh all mustering to

go to Lebanon um that killed and wounded something like 60 Israeli soldiers in that single attack.
So there's the uh there's the side 107 going out. And if we look at the next slide, I just gave you
a little freeze frame so that you could see what it looks like on its exit. And then now let's watch
in the next one. Watch it arriving in Israel. And there it is uh on the Israeli side shown by
civilians uh camera. This is going to be shot out of the air by an Apache attack helicopter. The
helicopters chase them all around. Um and we don't see a ton of these getting shot out of the air.
uh they would for sure want everyone that they do to be shown. Um and I think that they're pretty
rare. They they we saw them in those previous videos. They have a very small heat signature. They're
battery powered. Some

of them have wooden propellers. Um their radar cross-section is very minimal and it's very difficult
to see them. We saw in the first battle in 2024 that Israel had people literally eyeballing them um
on the other side of the border. Their job was to literally watch to see them flying and then radio
them in. And that was again for Israel. That was civilians doing that work uh for Israel that we
watched. I showed you guys a 60 minutes clip of that um the way that the civilians were integrated
into the military to do this kind of observation of these drones um because they're very difficult
to find with the traditional um military radars. Uh let's take a look at this pretty remarkable
operation number 21 we're on now. This is a Gdder anti-ship cruise missile that was launched um two
weeks back um launched at the sea. It's a pretty significant um weapon Maybe we

can loop that one more time without audio. And I can just uh point out a couple of things in this.
So this is a pretty significant missile. This is the first time we saw this uh in this battle. Um
this is an Iranian anti-ship cruise missile. There you see Immad McNeia who is the founder, the
builder, the architect of the Islamic resistance, the military wing um who was assassinated um in
Syria back in 2008 I believe. Um but his uh forces Haj Radwan is his nickname and the Radwan forces
are named after him, the shock troops, the um the most elite fighters in Hezbollah who are fighting
right now in the south. Um so they're saluting to Mugnia. They also dedicate this to Nasra. Um there
you can see uh Ham and uh Nasra, Ali Ham, and then uh his son along with uh Naim Kasum. um and they
saluted them with the launch of

that missile. So, a pretty significant operation. Uh Hezbollah said in the field report that they
were tracking an Israeli warship off the coast that was carrying out offensive operations. Um there
was some talk at the time that it may have been a British ship that was targeted. But according to
the field report, they had been tracking that vessel for hours before launching uh this attack. And
you can see um the way here that they are canister launched. Um, and Hezbollah has a number of these
and it's the reason why ships are not off the coast and it's the reason why the uh aircraft carriers
that were coming ostensibly to defend Israel had to stay so far off the Israeli coast that they
actually weren't much use in the um in the missile defense array because their radars were set back
too far um because of missiles like this. You can see the size of it

there. Um, and these are capabilities that Hzbala has. Um, and they the writing on uh know this
next, let's go to the next one. There you see it launch. It's a ski seping missile. So, it flies
just above um the sea and it got it flies below radar, most radar. Um, [snorts] and here you see
them launching a Pava cruise missile. This is an Iranian cruise missile and written on it says, "We
will never accept humiliation and our banner will never fall. We're watching it here be launched um
from its rail launch." And we saw these um I broke these down during True Promise one and True
Promise 2. The Iranians used these cruise missiles in um uh staggered attacks with ballistic
missiles and with drones. Um the cruise missiles are faster than drones, slower than ballistic
missiles, and so they make a layered uh um a layered attack that we haven't seen in this

round so much. Um but we definitely saw it in the demonstration battles of True Promise One and True
Promise 2. So this was an operation uh targeting Israeli troops in the Galilee panhandle. And again,
we're still in late March with these videos. We're getting them um about a week to 10 days later
again because it's very difficult to get these uh footages through South Lebanon. Um but still every
single day um on the minute of the operations, there is clearly command and control because the
field reports are filed within minutes of the operations. The field reports go all 24 hours around
the clock. Um and many days we're seeing 80 uh more than 70 up to 95 operations in a day. Um so a
remarkable tempo of operations still by Hezbollah. Let's take a look at 23. Um these are FATA class.
Um that's Hifa there they're showing you and an Israeli uh position south

of Hifa targeting the industrial base. Um uh this these are FATA um they're either FATA 110s or FATA
360s. We didn't know that Hzbollah had FATA 360s which are smaller versions of FATA 110s. Um but
we're we have seemingly seen these uh launched several times during the war um that are by
appearance uh FATA 360s. They're shorter range. Um but the FATA 110s we have seen launched and the
Fata 110s are what uh Iran has been using to um batter the Gulf. So you can see the launch of it
there. Precisiong guided um heavy warhead um you know real really accurate missiles um that
Hezbollah is using here against uh an Israeli base that is west of Hideera. You could see a good
shot of that missile there. So, these are heavy um and precise missiles and we've been seeing
apparently no shortage of these either. Hezbollah has promised to fight an existential battle. Naim

Kasam, the secretary general, spoke the other day and said that they're willing to fight till their
last breath. Um and that their banner will never fall. Um and so they're treating this as an
existential battle, which I think is a an appropriate way to look at um the fight when uh Israel is
promising to turn uh south Lebanon into Beth Hanoon, which was the sort of um you know, the
centerpiece of the genocide. Um so yeah, this does seem to be an existential fight for Hezbollah and
they have been fighting this battle um very significantly because we can remember people We heard
that Hezbollah was defeated. Um, Israel said that because they blew up some pagers and assassinated
um some senior generals and um of course Nasallah that uh Hezbollah was defeated. But we know
watching this program uh that we tracked the ground battle in South Lebanon um right up to the point
of

the ceasefire and and Hezbollah was not defeated. They repelled the ground invasion at that time.
Um, and they're doing it again this time, uh, in even more significant ways. Um, using even more of
their fighters. Let's look at 24. Um, because one of the things that Israel, um, so this is
actually, sorry, I was one ahead of myself. This is correct, 24. Um, they're, you're going to watch
uh, the Fowl one uh, heavy rockets be here, the 60 kilo warhead. And again, we're seeing that
Hezbala military media is giving cameras to the fighters um in a way that we never saw before. So,
we see the setup um of these operations, what goes into them, um how many men it takes uh qualified
fighters to execute these operations. And this is a pickupmounted uh fail uh phallic um rocket
launcher. So, you're seeing a uh pickup truck that the fighters say have no brakes. Um

they're talking to each other um as they're driving and he's saying, "I don't want to be filmed." He
says, "Don't film me. Delete it." And the other guy says to him, "What message do you send?" And he
says, "The resistance is just fine." And we remember back in 2024, uh Hezbollah released a video
when Israel said that they had destroyed all of Israel's all of Hezbollah's drones. Uh Hezbollah re
released a video showing a a bunker full of like thousands of drones that said our drones are just
fine. Um so that's what the fighter says here. And when they park here, they say the truck has no
brakes, so they got to put a stone behind it. There you see the fighter putting the stone behind it.
Um I guess the parking brakes blown on this one, but you see them raise the the launcher. Um and you
can see the fighters here. Um, oftentimes

we've been seeing the fighters that are doing these uh, manning the control, the launch controllers
um, have fingers missing from the pager operations. I think you'll see that in the next video. Um,
we've seen it in a few other videos as well. And Hezbollah has wanted to show those um because
Israel thought that that was the end of the war. if you blew some hands off some fighters and killed
a bunch of children um with the pagers um that Hezbollah would somehow collapse. Let's look at the
next one. 25. This is another one of these remarkable uh fadi launchers here. We're seeing in the
underground that preparation for it. Um, Israel said that they have destroyed uh 200 uh launchers
and guaranteed they've counted this uh FODI launcher multiple times because when you see it uh it's
in pretty rough shape but they still are able to use it. Um and so just puts further

lie to Israel's statistics of I mean I don't know where they get these numbers anyway but um you
know they've been bragging about number of barrels. So if a if a multiple launch rocket system has
16 barrels, they're they're saying we took out 16 rocket launchers, which is just not a very
accurate way of describing uh your hits. And even still, when hit these launchers, multiple
launchers here, you can see the fad launcher here. Um watch when the truck comes around the corner,
you'll see that it's been hit multiple times. Um the fighters say uh they quote from uh the Quran a
couple times, "Permission to fight has been given to those who are being fought." Um this is a
defensive war for Hezbollah. We see them in the trucks. We never we've never seen this before in
their videos. They were so tight about this kind of stuff. Um but in this round they've

shown us this video and it's just given us a remarkable ed uh edge into understanding what goes into
all these operations, the um professionalism of these different units that are normally um we only
see the rockets being launched. Um we don't see the crew behind it, but you can see um the way that
they camouflage their trucks. They conceal the launchers using the u the trees there. We'll get a
shot before. There's the fighters giving the uh victory sign as we see their personalities. All of
this stuff is just um it's just that's what happened. There's a fighter with who had his fingers
blown off showing you them. He wants you to see them as he carries out uh these operations. And this
is another fatty launcher. The fatty is a heavy warhead rocket. It has precisiong guided
capabilities that had been added onto them by Hezbollah. Um and these part these play a significant

part in attacking Israel's uh industrial base but also its troops behind um the backline um where
they're trying to muster to uh enter South Lebanon. So that has been this has been the resistance
report for day 923 of Israel's genocide and day 45 of Hezbollah's defense of South Lebanon.
