Title: How Hizballah drones hunt Israeli tanks, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-04-23
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hY25JlG7EY8
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: core weekly / user supplied

You are watching and listening to electronic defa. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance report on
day 930 of Israel's genocide in Gaza, day 55 of the USIsraeli war on Iran and day 52 of Hezbollah's
defense of South Lebanon. I am reporting this on the afternoon of Thursday, April 23rd, 7 days after
the 10-day ceasefire in Lebanon went into effect. Um on the la on the Iran front, Trump has extended
unilaterally apparently uh the ceasefire that uh 15-day ceasefire that expires is to expire today.
Um he said that he will continue focusing on the blockade of the straight of Hormuz for on that
score. There have been multiple boardings of ships by the US and also by the IRGC Navy. Um, so
there's a bit of a standoff in the straight of Hormuz with what is a porous blockade. Ships are
making it through the blockade um and have been over the last number

of days, but the US um and Iranians are picking off ships uh during that blockade. Um so that
standoff continues. For their part, the IRGC said that they are capable and powerful and uh are at
100% readiness with their fingers on the trigger and have been ready for a resumption of the war.
But this week, we're going to focus on Lebanon. Um everything that you are going to see on this
program, as always, was released in the past week since you last saw me. And with Hezbollah
operations, we're getting them about uh a week or 10 days um late after the operation took place
based on operational security, the distance traveled in the area and we have been following that
throughout the war. So let's take a look at the maps. Uh we'll start off with this. This is the key
area of the battle space for uh the past uh 40 plus days. Uh,

Israel said that they were going to take up to the Latani River. They have not done that at all.
They are within a couple of kilometers of the border. Um, they bragged this week that they had
destroyed in 5,500 targets hit, 4,600 air strikes and almost 15,000 artillery strikes that they had
dropped 165 uh multi-story family buildings. Um, Israel killed 200 uh 2294 uh Lebanese. 7544 have
been wounded. Um, and the killing has continued since the ceasefire has went into effect as is
always the case with Israel. Um, Israel is trying to achieve through negotiations at this point what
they have failed to achieve on the battlefield. They want the Lebanese armed forces to fight a civil
war in Lebanon against Hezbollah because Israel has been unable to defeat them despite telling us
that they were defeated uh last year. Uh clearly not the case. We've seen Hezbollah come back in
this battle with an

operational tempo that has been unprecedented in the history of the organization. Just during the
ceasefire alone, the National Council for Scientific Research in Lebanon documented 220 Israeli
ceasefire violations just in the first three days alone, including artillery shelling, mining um and
explosive operations. Again, they're trying to destroy houses. Um that is the principal uh aim of
this operation. They Israelis have been very clear about it. They want to turn uh the villages in
south Lebanon that you see along the border there, Nakura, Vintage Bale, Hiam, they want to turn
those into uh Beethanoon and Rafa using the Gaza model. Um and Hezbollah has not been patient this
time. Uh during the previous ceasefire, Hezbollah held their fire. This time they are not. They are
responding to operations uh that the Israelis uh carry out including Hezbollah four operations
yesterday that targeted uh a number of drones, a number of tanks um in the area uh

where Israeli forces attempted to move forward um from the ceasefire line. They were targeted. Of
course, Israel has carried out uh a number of attacks during this period as well. If we look at the
next map, you can see the way that the Israelis uh structured this operation. Those five points that
you see there along the border um at the bottom, that's Israel. And what you're seeing is five
forward bases that Israel built during the last ceasefire inside Lebanon. And they used those bases
as forward bases um for this operation. So they were already inside Lebanon, which means that 40
plus days, 7 weeks of fighting. Um, in many cases, the Israelis only made it hundreds of meters from
where they already were. Um, the goal, according to the Israelis, we won't get into it too much
right now because uh, we'll see if they're able to accomplish that, but their goal is to create

another yellow line like in Gaza, in South Lebanon throughout the villages. There's currently 55
villages that the Israeli military said people are unable to return are not allowed to return home
to. And then we've heard ministers in Israel talking about how uh like we heard with Gaza that the
goal is to destroy all of the houses so people do not have anywhere to return to. And the way that
Israel has been fighting this battle or uh they spoke with uh army radio commander spoke with army
radio about their doctrine. Um and the number four point in their doctrine was that the directive to
Israeli forces was wherever you identify a threat, engage but take no risks. So essentially a
doctrine of fear has been what has animated Israel's uh war in South Lebanon. Six divisions um are
involved in this including uh reserve divisions. This is more um it's the same number of divisions
that

operated in Gaza at the beginning of the Gaza war. But as I said last week, we know that the reserve
um recall of reserve soldiers uh did not uh return every soldier that uh was supposed to return like
they did in Gaza. So they had a full complement of forces in Gaza, but not in Lebanon from all that
we know. Um let's take a look at the map because you'll see this next map of Hzbollah engagements.
This is where this is direct confrontations with Israeli forces and you can see how this matches up
with the previous map where based on the five uh forward bases. Um you can see it along the coast in
Nakura along the western coast. Um, and then you can see Vintage Bale in the central um, sector
there uh, at the bottom of the map on the right. And then going up into the Galilee panhandle over
the Hoola Valley

uh, is the other uh, main uh, elements. So they had two divisions at each of those spots pushing
forward. Um, attempting to redraw the borderline is what Israel is trying to do here to create a
buffer zone. Um, that is their intention. We'll follow that as it goes. Um, let's take a look at the
next map because again it'll show you uh where their tanks were hit. 188 anti-tank operations during
this stage of the war. Um, you can see those also match pretty much with the um direct confrontation
maps. Um, but you can see there's a lot more anti-tank operations than direct confrontations because
the Israelis didn't have any interest in direct confrontations. And we'll we'll see that as we watch
these videos from this week. They show um they show that pretty starkly. So 188 anti-tank operations
as shown on that map there. Um let's go to the first operation. This is an anti-tank

guided missile strike. It's a pair of guided missile strikes in Canara uh area in the central sector
um in the south central sector. You can see there uh an Israeli Merkova tank crossing in behind that
house. We have footage here from from a distance uh looks like from the neighboring hilltop, but you
can see the tanks moving through um the town of uh Alcantara. And on the edge when it passes back
through this uh house on the far edge of the screen that you're looking at, you're going to see it
get hit by a Cornet anti-tank guided missile strike. something that we saw um all through
particularly the first stage of this war [snorts] um in after October 7th. Um there you can see the
a zoom in on it uh again of the hit direct strike. You can tell by the smoke uh the color of the
smoke. It's different than the smokec screen

smoke which is a a whiter color when they um they use their exhaust to create a smoke screen. And
now we're going to see in between here that targeted tank was obviously at least damaged, likely
destroyed and is going to be towed uh by another tank that you're going to see in between those
houses in between the circle there. You're going to see the first tank uh coming through and behind
it is the towed disabled tank that has been uh mission killed at least uh by that uh anti-tank
operation which was one of two. There's going to be a second anti-tank operation and indeed a third
one in the same location at the same time. This gives you another shot of the towing uh of the
disabled tank here. You know, we get a lot of comments in we got a lot of people in the comments uh
saying, "Do these tanks get hurt?" Um

we we see them clearly that way on top of hundreds of Israeli casualties from inside tanks uh
throughout the battle. Here you're going to see the second tank be targeted. And a third tank is
targeted uh moments later, although it is not caught on camera for that one. And then we have in
this next slide a zoomin that uh Tamara has done to make it a little bit more clear what we're
looking at. There's the first strike. You can see that pretty clearly and pretty obviously. Pretty
significant damage to the tank immediately. And in through that circle, you'll see the tank driving
in right now to pick up the destroyed tank. They'll hook it up and tow it out as we saw in Gaza
many, many times. Often they use uh D9 armored bulldozers in Gaza, but they are traveling
differently. There's the first tank pulling. You can see the chain that it's got and

their second tank that was destroyed being pulled. In Gaza, we saw them be pulled with multiple D9
bulldozers. Often we saw them lots pulled with tanks. Um but the D9s don't work with the tanks in
the same way in Lebanon as they did in Gaza. They worked in um in units in Gaza together. There you
see the tank being pulled uh through the neighborhood there in Alcantara. One of three tanks
destroyed during that operation. Um that operation was on March 28th. So uh in some cases we're
getting these 2 weeks after. Um let's look at the next slide. Um this is a stitch that I put
together of three FPV drone operations. Firsterson view. Uh that's what FPV is. It means that you
can have a video screen driver um and you can see the driver sees through this um and also it makes
a video of it. So you can see um the exact

route that the pilot took and these video these videos of course were uh made popular in the battle
in the Ukraine [snorts] uh in Ukraine. And this you can pretty clearly see that that is a school
that is being used. Again, all of the um all of the Israeli tactics from Gaza are being used in
Lebanon. They're using schools. They're destroying hospitals. They're targeting paramedics. They're
killing children. uh all of those uh are consistent doctrinal uh aspects of the Israeli military
fighting these wars as is the one that I read earlier where they don't want engagements. They want
uh they want to call in air strikes as soon as they get engagements and withdraw. They don't want to
stand and fight in South Lebanon. You can see the the tank there spotted. You could see the view of
the camera on these drones circle in and immediately target that Nom troop carrier there. And
there's

one more here. [snorts] Um, and you can see the difference and the reason why these drones are
useful in this terrain um where the there's a large distance to cover where Israel is able to have
the high ground in some places. is here's another one on a um on another Nom troop carrier there
side by side and we've seen as these have developed um this is from the uh NAO brigade commander
Colonel Eric Moyel he said that before the ceasefire we wouldn't dare to stick our heads out because
Hzbollah sends explosive drones and you can get hit by anti-tank missiles from long ranges. Um he
said that um that Hezbollah the way that Hezbollah fight they sent hundreds of militants to South
Lebanon to fight in the first days um with effective weapons with explosive drones and anti-tank
missiles dozens a day. The commander of the Nahul brigade who's fighting on the western sector um

said to uh army radio. Let's look at number seven cuz we have a drone dropping ammunition. This is
something we saw being used in Gaza to um strong effect as well. You can see it's got anti-personnel
ball bearings on the uh bottom of the RPG anti-tank warhead. Underneath you're seeing an artillery
position um linked to the 14th 46th Division um the 212th Fire Brigade, 213th Fire Brigade. And you
can see the uh Israeli soldiers there on the ground as the munition hits the ground after being
dropped. So now we're seeing the capability by Hezbollah to drop the drone uh to drop the uh anti-
tank missile instead of driving the drone as a suicide drone. Again, adaptations on the battlefield
that are happening in real time here with Hezbollah and finding these artillery positions is also
part of their uh significance intelligence along this. In the next few videos, you're going to see
that. And Hasba

has built these drones in uh a very smart way. They've used component parts that are very resilient
to a supply chain. They're not all prefixed. They are building these. These are Hezbollah built
drones. They're clean. They're smart. They're cheap. They're easy to assemble. They have resilience
um in the products because you can mix and match the uh component parts. Undetectable in the supply
chain, so you can't crack down on it. Um and they've chosen wisely at each one of these options. I
showed you this back uh a couple episodes ago when I really broke down the Hezbollah builds on
these, but just to reiterate um they're using common uh application common appliance common uh parts
that are used in appliances in common appliances that you would never be able to detect that they
are being bought in numbers. Um, and the total builds of these drones for each of these component
parts, the propeller, the

carbon fiber frame, brushless motor, customized battery array, um, the flight controller, um, the
camera and transmitter and antenna, all of that, all put together, you're looking at like a $200
build for these drones. So, this has been a really remarkable development that has happened in this
battle. We saw a couple of times, a handful of times, uh, drones be quadcopter drones be used, um,
during the first battles after October 7th. Um, but only a few times, a handful of times. This time
they're being used um, across sectors. Um, and they're being used very effectively. Let's take a
look at this next one. Number eight we're on now. Um, this is another quadcopter. You can see the
the quadcopter. um propellers in the front there. Um that gives you an indication. It's good. I've
been calling them quadcopters to be specific because Hezbollah of course also has drones. We've seen
that. Here we see a Nom

troop carrier and another development of the tactical approach hitting the rear of the vehicle. The
weakest spot. We haven't seen Hezbollah's targeting documents, but we know from Casam targeting
documents that the rear door is the target. And in those two storage containers that you're looking
at there are um are munition storage. So hitting those um is a prime target. So really just uh
tactical battlefield awareness just the increase. You can see in this flight he circles back rather
than diving down immediately on the target when it's identified. Um, we're seeing the pilots now
circle back and hit the spot on the vehicle that is the most um that is the weakest, the most
susceptible to the single RPG warhead that is being uh fired. And so in this case, it's an armored
troop carrier. So you have people um you could have as many as a dozen people uh holed up in that
tank. [snorts]

Um let's look at number nine. This is an uh around vintage bale. Of course, there was a lot of
fighting around vintage bail in the last couple of weeks. We're going to see that fighting in the
coming weeks because, as I've said, we have about a 2 week 10day uh lag between the operations and
the videos. This is a good example here of him circling back. See, they they've spotted the target
there, the Nom troop carrier. They fly over top of it, circle back around, get stable with the cuz
they're carrying underneath. They're carrying the anti-tank warhead underneath. So, they're aiming
it, balancing it, coming in low to it, and again, striking the rear door on a troop carrier where
the cabin is full of soldiers. So, instead of divebombing immediately, we're seeing these
developments, and this is happening like exponentially day overday during this battle. Um, number
nine, we're going to see them target

uh even more specifically here. This is in Al Bayada on the western coast just north of Nakura. You
can see the Mediterranean Sea in the background there as they come across. Um, and you can see the
way that this tank is tucked into the building so that people can exit right into the building
without being exposed. And that is a direct hit on the commander's hatch. Um, and on the commander
hat is the battlefield management system that's going to be targeted. You're going to see at the end
of this video the two places that it's about to be hit. This will blind the commanders. There you
can see those two uh and then that is the turret. Um that is the turret hatch for the commander. It
is the weakest spot uh on the top of the tank. And so uh another smart hit. And you can see the way
it matches with what the

Nahul brigade commander said that they um they don't stick their head up. They don't stick their
head up because Hezbollah is hitting from a distance um these operations, these anti-tank operations
and anti-personnel operations using anti-tank guided missiles and using these drones. And many of
these drones, we've seen crash drones that show these dream these drones are running fiber optic
cable um which prevents them from uh electronic warfare scrambling. So um another development that
we're seeing, they're running a spool um um they're running a spool that can be 3D printed. So
again, something that is resilient that can be done inhouse um without having a supply chain that
could be shut down. So again, this is this is just a very sophisticated way to hit this tank, very
uh wellprotected tank. U people see the tanks in Russia go up in flames, but these uh Marova tanks
are a lot stronger armor and so you have

to pick your spot, particularly with the 80 mm anti-tank warhead because it's not as strong as the
say the tandem yasine 105. So let's look look at let's take a look at number 10 here. um because
they're also targeting um electronic warfare stations. This is a newly established position here um
in up at the top of the Galilee panhandle inside Lebanon. They established another one of these
positions and intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance by Hzbollah is able to pick up these new
installations. And again, we're seeing not dive bombing immediately, but setting up the uh warhead
here, putting the drone in the right position to hit. And then once in the base, as you're going to
see here, they're going to penetrate the base on the top of this mountain. And inside the base,
they're not just hitting anything. They're hitting the nerve center right there, the electronic
warfare nerve center, um, to knock that out.

And that is what Israel uses for its battle space management. So these types of things are critical
to the Israeli battle. They put up these new positions and these new positions allow them to then uh
reach further into Lebanese territory. And so targeting these is a major setback, multi-million
dollar losses, um but also direct battlefield impact because of the way that these systems are used
in uh Israel's uh overall network uh connectivity for their troops. Um number 11 that you're going
to see them hit an Elbit uh system here. This is a um a technical highmobility shelter. Essentially,
it's like a base on wheels. You're going to see it on the back of a of a US Hemet here and it's a
direct hit again on that multi-million dollar loss. This is a mobile command and control
communication system. So again, a significant loss, a new position. Israel moves it into the new
position and

Hezbollah is immediately on it um and destroying it and not just hitting it randomly but hitting the
exact um high high value target inside that position. You can clearly see um direct hit on that and
with an anti-tank warhead onto that that shreds that vehicle. That vehicle has no chance against um
an anti-tank warhead, a high explosive uh anti-tank warhead. So, we're seeing high value targeting
uh quality operations with these quadcopters. We're seeing these quadcopters released virtually
every day. They're part of more than 300 drone operations um throughout this war and dozens of them
have been part of the 188 anti-tank operations um that we've seen as well. And you can see again the
camera is right dead center on the target. And so that's a hit. You can see that in this next slide
here as the you can see the helmet and you can see the um the Elbbit system. So it's another

Elbit system that is being destroyed. Now let's take a look at the rocket operations that Hasba has
been executing. This is the map of those operations essentially covering all of the border area but
also uh some deep into uh into Israel. The split is about 50/50 between operations. Um there was
1127 operations inside uh Israel and,00 inside Lebanon. So split basically right down the middle.
The rocket operations uh the IDF said that there was 8,000 rockets fired at them. Hasbollah said
that there was 1,400 rocket operations and that's just the number of individual operations. So you
can see where those match up. Um the targets are in uh troops behind Israeli troops that are in the
rear um that are mustering to go into Lebanon. They're being hit constantly and we can hear um
Israeli chatter about that all the time. We know that a number of their um casualties were group
soldiers being hit

by artillery and rocket fire. um a number of the fatalities as well that the Israelis have been kind
of um keeping under wraps it seems again uh were from that kind of rocket fire. And in that map that
you're looking at there uh in the bottom right corner is the zoom in on uh each of the positions
along the border that I showed you in that previous map. So um logical rocket operations that are
happening across all sectors across all types of rocket munitions. So everybody is involved in this
battle and that's why you're seeing the tempo of operations be higher than anything that we um have
ever seen before from Hezbollah and Naim Kasam the secretary general said they said this is an
existential war. We've seen the fighters say it's an existential war while they're on the front
lines fighting and that is how Hezbollah has treated this operation. They're also treating this

ceasefire as um whatever Israel does they respond to. They're not being um patient with this
ceasefire like they were with the last one. And Hezbollah has been able to carry out 2,200
operations um averaging about 50 a day with peak of 98 and many days over 90 uh during this
operation. Um so let's take a look at a Hasba field gun operation because these were remarkable. I
showed you these a couple shows ago. Um, but these are effectively these are World War II field guns
that we're seeing in effect. Um, you know, maybe they're built a little bit after World War II, but
they are uh from that vintage uh of weapon. And we see them here with a buried launching site. Um,
so they've got an underground uh artillery placement here for a towed field gun, 130 mm towed field
gun. You can see the size of the shell that's being loaded. You can

see how many guys it takes to operate this. We're looking at a picture of Nasala on the side as
always. Um, and we're seeing this long uh shot, like a single shot that we uh get to really see what
goes on in these operations. I talked about that last week. um that they're giving the fighters
cameras that didn't previously have cameras um rather than having um formal military media um
operatives with the cameras like we saw in Gaza um we're seeing a lot more of um cameras being given
to the fighters here and you can see in this underground launch site very difficult to track for
counter battery fire um because they're underground and we saw earlier the barrel raise up from the
uh underground ground as well. So, across all sectors, across all capabilities, this is one of 184
artillery operations. Uh, and it gives you an idea of what the other 183 looked

like, how many guys it takes um to operate these. And I mean, a field gun like this is a very it's a
very useful weapon. You can see there from the underground firing position that you can't you can
barely see uh where the launch site is when you're standing beside it. Um, so it's very useful and
they were using these um as troops mustered ready to go into a town and you fire these field guns
from relatively short distances. They're uh roughly uh accurate enough. Um, and they're very useful.
So, it was really interesting to see these that that's a 130 mm M46 field gun for those keeping
track at home. Um, let's look at 15 because we got more of these fatty launchers and we w the whole
trip with the fellas in the car on their way. This is something we didn't used to get at all and now
we get at almost

every video. They arrive at the site of the launcher. It's a launch truck. It's truck mounted
launcher. You can we're looking here at no cab because it has previously been hit um at least once,
maybe multiple times. Completely destroyed the cab, but Hzbollah has rebuilt it. and they're showing
us that now you can see them driving here with no front windshield with no roof uh with a couple of
pictures of Nasala and Naim Kasum um and Kamina and you can see their quads there that they have
made famous in South Lebanon driving this truck to the site of the launch. Here they are arriving.
victory signs by the driver who you can see his entire body cuz there's no windshield, there's no
roof uh on this launcher. And these guys while they're talking they're making fun of Netanyahu there
because Netanyahu the day before this operation had come out and said, "Oh, we have destroyed

80% of their launchers." And so these guys are laughing back and forth amongst themselves just
saying like, "Uh, is this does this launcher count as one that Netanyahu hit?" Now they're showing a
picture of NRAA. There's the fighters all celebrating before they launch. And it's a perfectly
effective FOD launcher. The FOD is an 80 kg warhead, 70 km um range for the FOD 1. Not sure if this
is a FOD 1 or a FOD 2. Um the FOD 2 is 170 kilos and 100 km range. We can see that in the next two
pictures, too. Um you can see the cab, the here, this is the one with the cab, the two fighters
faces are blurred. One's carrying a flag. One's carrying Nesala's picture. Uh, and they're arriving
to the site in a truck with no front window, no side doors, and no roof. Um, the next slide, you can
see that same truck set

up to launch. And you can see the cab uh barely exists on the front of that. Uh, and these are
longer range uh rockets built by Hezbollah. We often see these rockets used to target the interior.
Um, we see this used against Gileo a lot, which is where the Mossad base and unit 8200 base is in
Tel Aviv. So, they're firing these um on Tel Aviv a lot of times. If this is behind the Latani
River, they're using this to fire on military bases in Hifa at the naval port. Um, and there's one
more photo like this that's that shows the full launch uh glory. It's remarkable operation. And one
of these days when the war is over, I'm going to uh break down some of these VOD videos because they
are really remarkable in the way that the fighters have been able to uh keep them in the battle
despite them being targeted uh

numerous times. And of course, just for this last map, I want to just show you what uh Israel's
targets really were and what they always are. This is from the Lebanese Ministry of Health. um since
the beginning of the aggression as I said 2294 martyrs 7544 wounded um 98 paramedics killed 356
paramedics wounded um targeting health sector 116 ambulances destroyed 25 hospitals destroyed 25
clinics destroyed six hospitals destroyed um it's just remarkable uh remarkable savagery targeting
civilians of course last night. They also uh targeted and killed um al Akbar journalist Amal Khalil
and she was pursued and pinned down and ultimately killed uh by the Israelis. They didn't allow
anyone in to um to rescue the injured at the time they were injured. She was with her colleague
Zanab Faraj who was ser severely wounded. Um, the Red Crescent eventually after hours got in to save
Zanab and she was able to be rescued. Um,

only return hours later to find Amal's body in the rubble. Um, Amal was previously threatened by
messages from the IDF that said that if she didn't leave Lebanon um that she needed to leave Lebanon
if she wanted to keep her head attached to her body. So that's that's Israel for you. targeting
children, hospitals, uh, schools, uh, paramedics and journalists, uh, for simply doing their job.
Um, and I wanted to bring that, of course, because, uh, behind all the military analysis is often
just these straight up attacks on civilians that the Israelis are so famous for. So, this has been
the resistance report for day 930 since uh Kasam's October 7th raid that dismantled the Gaza
division in minutes um and the subsequent genocide in Gaza. >> [music] >> Hey.
