Title: War on Iran: How US "security guarantees" set the Gulf on fire, with Ali Abunimah
Date: 2026-03-13
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eWMUf9W7HMg
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: regional context

You're watching and listening to the electronic interfer live stream and I'm Ali Abuner. And since
the US and Israel launched the war on Iran on February 28th, the Iranian people have endured a
devastating assault that is striking far beyond military targets. Cities are being bombed, schools
and hospitals damaged, and more than a thousand civilians, including many children, have been
killed. Ancient treasures from the Golthan Palace to historic uh quarters in Isfahan have been
damaged. Oil depot strikes have filled to her own skies with tech toxic smoke, threatening public
health and the environment. Iran is of course hitting back against Israel and US bases and interests
across the region. As this war goes on, I want to step back and look at the question of how to
achieve security from two major perspectives. One is the perspective of the Gulf states that and
other Arab regimes that allied with the US and Israel and on the

other hand is Iran. And to do this, first I want to look at a few segments from a conversation that
was recorded in July of 2024 at the Aspen Security Forum between Washington Post columnist David
Ignasius and she nasal bin al- Khalifa. He is the son of the king of Bahrain as well as the
country's national security adviser and commander of the royal guard. Of course, Bahrain is one of
the Gulf states allied with the United States and Israel, and it it was uh or still is at least on
paper a major US military base, the headquarters of the fifth fleet. And for context, this
conversation was recorded about 8 months into the genocide in Gaza and a few months after Iran
carried out its first true promise operation, retaliating for Israel's bombing of Iran's diplomatic
mission in Syria. So this first clip is Al Khalifa answering a question about why Bahrain signed up
to

the Abraham Accords. That's the Trump sponsored agreements uh between various Arab states and
Israel. Um we are from the optimist camp and when we went for the Abraham Accord um we we we didn't
have a laundry list um and we didn't have any um list that we wanted to achieve first of all and
then we will sign the Abraham Accords. Um signing the Abraham Accords was basically one of the most
important milestones that we have achieved. um we have opened a channel with the uh Israelis and the
officials and the Israeli government and I see this is why we should continue and this is why we
should always keep an open door and the channel with the Israelis. >> So that's uh Al Khalifa
talking about the relationship with the Israelis. Now let's hear a clip of him answering a question
about Bahin's relationship with Iran and the possibility of diplomacy with Iran. Remember this

is in mid 2024. >> Well, we we are strong believers in two paths, deterrence and diplomacy as well.
Um and in the art of diplomacy, we should always keep an open door. Um I know we have cut relations
with Iran. We have zero contact with Iran. Um and I think talking to Iran like what we have done in
the during the Abraham Accords talking to Israel is always important for us always important for the
security of the region. Um we should always keep these channels open in order to um get a proper
structure uh for our security and stability and harmony in the region. So, >> so he he does go on to
say that Bahin has been talking to Iran. But the words that really stand out there are we have we
cut relations with Iran. We have zero contact with the Iranians. And this is at the same time that
Bahrain and other

Gulf regimes were launching into this love affair with Israel and deepening the love affair in the
midst of a genocide. And if you recall last week, we spoke about how Iran has never at any time
attacked any of its Arab neighbors. So you have to keep that in mind when you hear about this zero
contact policy and cutting off relations with Iran. Now the next clip is Al Khalifa describing a
security agreement between Bahrain and the United States called the comprehensive security
integration and prosperity agreement signed in 2023 also known as CIPA. So let's listen to him
talking about what is the essence of that agreement. CIPA um it is one of the most important uh
achievements we have achieved for the Kingdom of Bahrain and the United States. Why? Because it's
not just uh military defenseorientated. It is a comprehensive security integration and also it has
the prosperity agreement element in it. Uh if

you allow me with my great memory I I had my notes with me. I would like to point three articles in
that agreement which are the most important things and believe me we have fought hard for those
articles until we got them right. So article two which is the most important thing is defense and
security cooperation. Article three is the economic commercial and trade cooperation. Article four
is science technology and network security. Let me read out a paragraph from article 2 and then
we'll talk about it. I'm quoting CEPA right now. Any external aggression or threat of external
aggression against the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of any of the parties
shall be a matter of grave concern to the other parties. In the event of external aggression or
threat of external aggression against one party, the parties shall in accordance with their
respective constitutions and laws immediately meet at the most senior levels to

determine additional defense needs and to develop and implement appropriate defense and deterrent
responses as decided upon the parties including in the economic, military and or political realms.
The parties stand ready to immediately share available and appropriate information and intelligence
in response to such an event. So you can see he's very proud of this security agreement with the
United States where if Bahrain is attacked uh the United States is going to rush to Bahrain's
assistance or at least to have meetings about rushing to Bahrain's assistance and if the United
States is attacked Bahrain which is roughly the size of O'Hare airport in Chicago is going to come
to the defense of the United States. Um and Al Khalifa goes on to say that Bahin was working to
expand the same model across the region. So let's hear that clip now too. Well um we are right now
working on the expansion of this agreement. Um and

also letting other countries join the U agreement. It started as a bilateral agreement but it is
eventually going to become a multilateral agreement. um um and looking at a wider scope. It's not
just the Middle East. Um so we are looking at showing that the United States has a lot of friends
around the world and this agreement should bring the true friends all together. Now what's important
about it is I believe that this is the furthest the United States went in in in security guarantees
to an Arab state. So this is why I hardly suggest that we should go forward. It is short of article
5 um but has all the guarantees. So you can see there when uh Al Khalifa refers to article five he's
talking about article five of the NATO treaty which very famously obligates uh all NATO members to
come to the assistance of any other NATO member that's attacked. So

this mutual defense guarantee. So he's saying it's almost that it's it's almost as strong as that
and he's very proud of it. Well, what does this mean in practice for Bahrain and not just Bahrain
but other Arab regimes that are in a similar situation? We're focusing on Bahrain here because we
have this interview. But you can apply the same logic to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, Jordan, and
other countries that are in this bar in this same basket. And so I'm going to skip back to an
earlier part of the interview because that's where we see what all this actually amounts to in terms
of what Bahrain and the other Arab regimes are offering to the United States. This clip is about
it's a bit longer. It's about 3 minutes, but I think it's very revealing. an important uh day in the
Middle East that I don't think gets enough recognition uh is uh April 13-4

when Iran launched an attack on Israel of turned out to be 100 ballistic missiles, probably 250
drones. Um and it was essentially completely stopped by integrated air defense and extraordinary um
uh performance by a number of air forces obviously led by by Israel. What's not widely understood uh
is that Sentcom uh starting several years ago organized integrated air defense and radars including
countries in the Arab world such as Bahrain. So that night of April 13 was an important one for
Bahrain. And I'd like and I sure our audience would be interested in hearing what that was like for
you, what you knew about the Iranian threat as those missiles and drones were launched and whether
you think this air defense integration might be the beginning of some broader regional defense
cooperation. >> Um well, deterrence is our key word, right? um in in all aspects when we speak about
our re uh region and its

conflicts um and especially when we um pinpoint Iran uh being within the mix um don't forget Iran is
only 200 miles away from the Kingdom of Bahrain. Uh we host the fifth fleet uh command over there
with multinational uh commands as well. So we play a vital role um in the deterrence and also the
stability of the region. Uh we are proud of it. Um it's been running on now for more than 75 years.
Uh which is uh a great achievement for the kingdom of Bahrain. It wasn't only for the kingdom of
Bahrain but also for the region. So um I refer to my grandfather when he he he um described the
fifth fleet as the mountain of fire that is protecting us from all threats. Um well that night in
specific you know we we we were all in duty and uh we are always in close contact with our uh
colleagues and allies

and um the region itself. Um thank god we have a proper integrated system um especially trying to
cover um our uh airspace. So this is excellent uh example for how we should come come closer, how we
should always integrate our efforts and always layer the uh the map and make sure that we don't let
uh lose any um uh I mean we should airtight the region in specific um but there's so much details to
go into that uh specific attack. Um we know um many countries have been um in charge of the
deterrence itself and we are proud as the Kingdom of Bahrain to be part of that integrated system.
So I I just note the importance of of that. Um on that night uh many countries as uh his highness
just said including Bahrain certainly including Jordan were part of the defense that um prevented
the war. If if those missiles had landed and

hit their targets um we would have been in a very different situation. So that's uh Nasar al-
Khalifa, the son of the king of Bahrain, talking to Washington Post columnist David Ignatius in July
2024 at the Aspen Security Forum. And what you can see there is what the what Israel and the United
States got out of Bahrain's total subservience. And of course that applies to the other states in
the region. Uh what did but what did Bahrain and the other Gulf states get? Uh you heard the prince
there saying that he considered the American fifth fleet to be the mountain of fire that would
defend Bahrain against the supposed threat from Iran. Well, where is the fifth fleet now? It's not
in Bahrain. It's not even in the Persian Gulf. I'm sure that John Elma will be talking about that in
a little while. So, did they get the security they were promised? Did they

get this almost NATOike guarantee? I would argue that they got the opposite. And it's very clear
from what's going on that it is precisely their alliance with the United States and Israel that made
them into targets. It was their hostility and zero contact policy with Iran that led them to host US
bases that were used to attack Iran and that made them into targets. So this is a failed model of
security. Whether they will wake up to that remains to be seen. Iran also appears to be re re-
evaluating its own security model and that's what I want to look at next. Um I want to look at this
uh briefing from uh March 11th. So that's yesterday as we're speaking uh given by Ibrahim Sulfari
the spokesperson for Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps which of course is one of the major
branches of Iran's uh military. It's in Farsy which I don't speak but I

was able to listen to the Arabic interpretation provided by Al Jazzer and I'm going to just
summarize some of the key points that Sulfari makes. I think we can play the video just so you can
see what it looks like. So just summarizing the main points that I wrote down uh from what Zulfakari
says. He says due to their successive defeats, the American and Israeli enemies are suffering a
collapse in their morale and experiencing delirium. To Trump and the Zionist child killers and
Mossad, we warned you repeatedly, you can start this war, but we, the armed forces of Iran, will be
the ones who decide when it ends. Because Iran holds the initiative in the Strait of Hormuz, we do
not need to close the Strait of Hormuz. The closure is due to what the Americans and Zionists have
done to the states of the region. We emphasize that we will not permit one liter

of oil to pass through the strait for the US. the Zionists and their accompl accompllices. Any ship
working for them that tries to pass will be a legitimate target for us. Your strategy of hiding
behind the states of the region and other states in West Asia is over. Hiding in civilian places and
behind infrastructure will not shield your cowardly army from the trap you have placed yourselves
in. Your bases and places will be targeted one after the other. The fire you started will burn you.
The period of tit for tatat strikes and successive strikes is over. We have entered a period of
continuous strikes until you are punished and regret what you have done. For once, be honest and
don't hide behind bravado. Admit that you are defeated. Admit your error. You have threatened to
send your navies to this region. You tried getting close once, but our rockets forced you to flee.
We were

waiting for this from the first day of the war so we could show you that your cowardly army is much
weaker than you thought. You will not be able to use artificial measures to bring down oil prices.
From the start of the war, we told you to get ready for $200 a barrel oil. You are the cause of the
insecurity in the region. The armed forces of the Islamic Republic will not permit your forces to
move in this area and we will strike with full force. We will avenge the pure blood of Alida, women,
children, and the innocence of Minab. So that's the speech from Zulfakari yesterday. And the
elements you see there, he says that the the period of tit for tatat is over. Iran is now going to
strike until it's mets goals. And we see this message reinforced today in the first speech from the
new supreme leader of Iran Ayatah Mushtame

who is of course the son of the leader who was murdered by uh Israel and the United States in the
opening attacks of this war. and uh there were brief uh or summaries published in the media but
while we've been on air the tessim news agency published the entire text in far so what I'm reading
is um a or what I'm quoting is a a machine translation but it it's pretty good and obviously the
speech is long so I'm only going to point to a few excerpts that are relevant to this analysis but a
few other things I thought were interesting as well. So one thing that's quite remarkable is he says
that he says that uh I must briefly state my situation and position regarding the vote of the
esteemed assembly of experts. I your servant say Mushtab Hussein learned about the result of the
vote of the esteemed assembly of experts the at

the same time as you and through the Islamic Republic's television. So what he's saying there is he
didn't seek this position. He didn't even know he was uh being nominated. The speech is uh quite
long and interesting and directed at various audiences internal and external. Um but the part that
has so far been widely quoted and is relevant here addresses the Iran's strategy in terms of the
war. And he says here in the part addressing the armed forces of Iran, he says, "Dear brother
warriors, the demand of the masses of the people is to continue the effective defense." And he says,
"The lever of blocking the straight of Hormuz must definitely continue to be used." He also
addresses Iran's allies. He says, "I also sincerely thank the warriors of the resistance front. We
consider the countries of the resistance front to be our best friends and the cause of resistance
and the resistance front are

an inseparable part of the values of the Islamic revolution. Undoubtedly, the solidarity of the
components of this front will shorten the path to liberation from the Zionist sedition. As we have
seen, the brave and faithful Yemen did not stop defending the oppressed people of Gaza. and the
devoted Hezbollah has come to the aid of the Islamic Republic of Iran despite all obstacles and the
Iraqi resistance has also courageously taken the same line. So he is reaffirming Iran's commitment
to resistance and to Palestine and I think that's an important uh message uh and and signal as to
the direction that Iran and its leadership are going to continue to go. Um he uh addresses Iran's
neighbors which includes Bahrain and the other countries that we were just talking about. He says,
"We have 15 neighboring countries by land or sea and have always been and are willing to have warm
and constructive relations with all of

them, but the enemy has been gradually establishing military and financial bases in some of these
countries for years to secure its dominance over the region. In the recent attack, some military
bases were used and naturally, as we had explicitly warned, we simply attacked those bases without
attacking those countries. From now on, we will inevitably continue to do so. Although we still
believe in the need for friendship between ourselves and those neighbors, these countries must make
their duty clear to the aggressors of our beloved homeland and the murderers of our people. I
recommend that they close those bases as soon as possible because they must have realized by now
that the claim of establishing security and peace by America was nothing more than a lie. So you can
see there the diametrically opposed visions of security that uh you have on the one hand the Gulf,
Bahraini, Saudi, Kuwaiti, Qatari etc. view that inviting the US

and Israel in makes you safe and Iran saying inviting Israel and the United States in puts you in
danger and stands in the way of the friendly relations we want to have with you. So both visions are
now being tested. Which one prevails will determine the future of the region for generations to
come. And that is now being tested through force. Uh which side will be able to impose its will
through war is essentially what we are seeing now. And undoubtedly that is something that was forced
by the US and Israel but many people across the region are paying the price. So just I want to now
just go to uh what happened at the UN security council last night. Now one person who seemed to
understand the situation extremely well is Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov. might have seen
this clip uh from a few days ago of him responding to a delegation of

Arab ambassadors in Moscow urging Russia to tell Iran to stop what they called unprovoked attacks on
those Arab countries. And Lavro's response was very uh skillful. And I'll just read a couple of
excerpts of what he told them. He said the Arab group on beha on whose behalf you are speaking did
indeed warn against escalation. Many of the Arab monarchies publicly said that things should not be
taken toward a military solution and that they would not allow their airspace to be used. But when
it all began, contrary to your repeated appeals to the United States and Israel, did you condemn
what the United States and Israel started to do? Did you condemn the deaths of 170 girls in a
school? We do not want the Gulf countries on whose behalf you speak to suffer. We believe that what
is happening does not give our Arab colleagues any military advantage. But we also cannot accept the

logic according to which Iran's actions are unacceptable while everything the United States and
Israel do is not even subject to discussion. Do you understand what I mean? Then he says, "A
country," referring to Iran that is in the middle of negotiations is subjected to treacherous
aggression and yet it agreed to continue the negotiations. And finally, he says, "Simply saying that
Iran has no right to do anything means that you are effectively encouraging the United States and
Israel to continue. This is illogical." He says a lot more but those are the uh parts I pulled out
that that eliminate that that illuminate uh I think the key points. So it was extremely
disappointing that yesterday in the UN Security Council, Russia and China abstained on a completely
one-sided resolution sponsored by Bahrain and other Arab states and backed by the United States
which strongly condemns Iran while remaining totally silent about the ongoing USIsraeli attack on

Iran. Russia and China allowed this resolution to pass just like they allowed Trump's so-called
board of peace resolution to pass in November. And I want to share two reactions that I think sum
things up correctly. The first is professor Balak Krishnan Raja Gopal and he is the United Nations
special reporter on the right to adequate housing and he says another security council resolution
which undermines peace and security condemning Iran exercising its right to self-defense while
saying nothing about the illegal act of aggression against Iran by the US and Israel. I condemn it
as illegal and unprincipled. And I also want to share the reaction of human rights lawyer Craig
Muhibar who we have regularly hosted on this program. And he writes, "For the second time in four
months, the UN Security Council has today bowed to the US Empire and its vassels and ignored
international law on its behalf. and neither Russia nor China have

acted to stop it through their veto rights. In the middle of the unlawful and bloody USIsrael access
aggression on Iran, the council is entirely silent on the aggression and on Iran's charterbased
right to defend itself. Instead of condemning the aggressors, it condemns only Iran for attacks on
the territory of countries in the region hosting US military bases, some of which have been directly
complicit in the aggression, proving once again how oil and money are valued more than sovereignty,
human lives, lives, or international law. The resolution gained a record number of sponsors. The
council has allowed genocide and serial aggression to continue for more than two years in the region
without action and has decided that oil prices are a step too far. I have to say I share those uh
sentiments and I find it baffling that Russia and China would veto this. They would have lost
nothing by vetoing it. They could have vetoed

it and said, "Now, let's talk about a real resolution." And I've also heard people saying, "Oh,
well, these resolutions don't really matter because they get ignored." And that's true. We saw
multiple resolutions ordering Israel to stop its massacres in Gaza being ignored with no
consequences. But that doesn't make them inconsequential because they legitimize uh a completely
illegitimate situation. And if Russia and China don't think they're consequential, why do they show
up at the Security Council and debate and vote? If they don't think the UN is important, they they
should leave it. But as long as they are there, they need to fulfill their responsibility. Not just
looking after their own national interests, but looking after broader interests, which is their
responsibility as permanent members of the security council. So this was deeply deeply
disappointing. >> Thank you so much Ally for that broadspectctrum analysis. Um, I mean, you know, I
I just keep thinking like

I I wish uh our our corporate mainstream uh would do a fraction of the kind of, you know, connecting
the dots and pointing out um why and how Bahrain, for example, um made the deal with, you know, the
the imperial corps um and full well knowing that it wasn't going to get anything out of it except
thrown under the bus. Um, and I mean it's it's it's remarkable um how everything seems to be falling
apart for the US uh politically in the Gulf. And um who knows >> what what but you know there
there's no limits. They have no limits and no red lines in terms of how far they're willing to go.
absolutely maintain their hegemony to maintain their empire and the brutality and ruthlessness that
we saw in that we saw in Gaza through two and a half years of genocide is their model. >> And
they're now doing that gleefully in Lebanon,

in uh in Iran. I mean, bombing apartment buildings in Iran, bombing the school in Iran, uh bombing
the oil tank, I mean hospitals, you know, dozens of hospitals already. We we spoke about that
already last week. So no outcome is is guaranteed. And what what is Iran saying? You know, Iran has
been so demonized. But all they have said and all they have been saying all along is we just want to
live in peace. We want good relations with our neighbors. And then you know that that map that we
always see that meme of uh look how close Iran put itself to its US bases. Well, where are the
bases? Iraq, Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia,
Jordan, um >> I thought I named Qatar. Pakistan essentially because you know Pakistan has been a CIA
base of operations in the region for decades. So Iran is literally surrounded by host countries

that are if not directly hostile uh host to a country the United States that has been seeking to
destroy Iran for almost five decades. Yeah. And if people can't see that, then they're just too um
influenced by either sectarian propaganda or other forms of propaganda that uh you know that just
defy logic. And this is important. It's not just about Iran. I mean Iran deserves peace and security
like everyone else. Its people do. But nobody else in the region can have peace and security either.
No one. And and this is what's at stake is whether people will be allowed self-determination and
liberation and the right to live in their own lands safely without the US and Israel murdering them
at will >> or sanctioning them for decades.
