Title: Hizballah drones pursue Israeli troops, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-05-14
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4O-lAj1idkY
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: core weekly / user supplied

All right, so you are watching and listening to the electronic itifada. I am John Elmer. This is the
resistance report on day 951 of Israel's genocide in Gaza and day 73 of Hezbollah's defense of South
Lebanon. I'm going to be covering week 10 of the battle here and we'll get right into it with the
maps as usual um so people understand where the areas are fighting. If we start on the left uh in
the western coast, Nakura and up at the Ras Alba Baya um headlands, we'll see those on film this
week. Um that's where a lot of operations have been taking place. Bintage Bale still has operations.
Israel is demolishing Bintage Bale now uh as they're doing with 55 villages all along the just above
the blue line that you see there. Um and then uh a real concentrations of a battle along the western
edge of the Galilee panhandle which is on the

right hand side there that goes up uh juts up into Lebanon Israeli territory that's topped up with
um Matula there. all from that coast from Hoola north um all through those valleys and up to the
Latani riverbed has been um the main three areas of uh conflict. The Israelis still are deploying
six divisions or parts of six divisions at least. I've said this many times, but I don't believe we
don't believe it's uh not believable uh that Israel is getting full uh reserve their reserve
compliment of soldiers are not all deploying. the Israeli chief of staff uh Al Zamir is still
talking about the collapse of the Israeli military that it's unable to handle this sustained these
sustained operations over these past uh 2 and a half plus years of genocidal rampage. Um but that's
what they are doing in um Lebanon as well. What we saw in Gaza, it's the same same army, same

people, same decision makers. And so their decision is they cannot defeat the resistance. And so
they attack the civilians, they destroy civilian homes. Um they uh apply what used to be called the
Daha doctrine but is now being called the Bhanoon uh or Rafa doctrine where you completely destroy
um every single thing in the town. And Bintage Bale right now is being uh set up for that. If we
look at the next map, we'll I've shown you this one before, too, but it's good to see these were the
five positions that Israel set up inside Lebanon during the last purported ceasefire, which again is
not a ceasefire in any way. Um, but those are forward positions inside Lebanon that Israel has been
able to use to advance. So even the um you know hundreds of meters to a few kilometers that Israel
has crossed the border uh into Lebanon is uh it's mitigated by the

fact that the these positions were already inside Lebanon. So the resistance has not allowed them to
advance deep into this territory below the Latani River which Israel at the beginning of this war
promised that they were going to take control of. They pretty quickly after that adjusted and said
they were just going to make a buffer zone, a security zone. Um, and the security zone that's the
same language as the, you know, late 1980s and 1990s period where South Lebanon was a security zone
and Hezbollah's resistance drove the Israelis out of South Lebanon. And when I say drove them out, I
mean literally. They left their computers. The soldiers left their computers, their uniforms hung
up. they turned on their heels and ran down the hill. Uh that's how the occupation of South Lebanon
ended. Um and so there is uh a point of reference for that for people. And Hezbollah has leaned into
that

during these past um number of weeks, releasing psychological operations videos that point um that
show the carnage from Hezbollah operations in the 1990s and how they created a climate within Israel
that the um the force could just not stay. Um the occupation was impossible. They couldn't defeat
the resistance and they withdrew. So there is um a point in history that uh is being looked upon by
both the Israelis um and the Lebanese. Let's take a look at the next one. Number two here. Um this
is Bintage Bale being erased uh satellite image of it. This is by an Israeli military adjacent uh
open- source mapper Benion Males. And you can see this is just from uh these from these past two
months. And you can see the destruction in that the before and after. Um just looks like what we
started every resistance report in Gaza with this kind of report of the destruction. Um

and in this week uh that I'm covering everything you're going to see is uh happened in the past
week. Um and as ever. So uh we will do that like we always do. Let's take a look at the next one
because this is the Ministry of Health. Uh these stats get released uh early in the week. So for our
production schedule, they're already out of date by the time they're published. Um by the time we uh
we're by the time you see us on this show. So this is um this is as of the 10th. Um they come out
each week at the beginning of the week. And what we're looking at here is 11,539 casualties. uh
almost 3,000 killed when you take the last few days uh in. But of course, also like Gaza, it's the
same army, same generals, um same politicians. You see that the health care sector is the prime
target.

16 hospitals damaged or or destroyed, three shut down entirely, 139 attacks on paramedics um which
have 139 paramedics killed, 212 wounded, 27 paramedic stations attacked and destroyed, 130
ambulances destroyed, and like I said, 16 hospitals. Um and that is the way that they have been f
fighting this war. And when we're about we're about to watch uh a more than a dozen uh Hezbollah
drone videos, it's just worth noting what the Israelis used their drones for. This week they used uh
a drone to attack a father and his daughter, his young daughter. The first strike destroyed the car
and injured both of them. They both ran from the car. The second strike killed the father uh and the
drone chased the young girl down and killed her as well. So um you're going to see a very strong
juxtaposition between the resistance targeting only uh Israeli military targets uh and the Israelis
targeting almost exclusively

civilian targets. Um so that's three. Let's take a look at number four. Um this is a good video.
This was from last Wednesday. Um it's just a good video because it's a good crisp digital uh video
feed here. So, we can see really really clearly uh a number of things. The way that they have torn
up the roads to get rid of the IEDs. There's a direct hit um right there on the uh loaders hatch.
So, we see them targeting uh in specific places on these tanks. But as I predicted last week, um I
thought we were going to start to see more um softer targets, more troop positions hit um than these
um these shots on these tanks when the tanks are zipped up are really difficult uh operations. Um,
as I talked about before, we can look at number five just to show you the um you could actually you
could see on

this one on the left there um you could see the um trophy active protection system had the launcher
had turned to face the drone but obviously didn't wasn't able to um engage it in time. And here
maybe we can loop this one back through tomorrow. Um this is a drone that is seen flying through an
Israeli military position near Matula uh on during this weekend and you can see um I mean the ease
with which it flies through there but you could also see the build and if we look at the next slide
you can see um what that drone looked like and again we've seen these builds a number of the builds
here we have batteries on the bottom um we've seen them various other ways batteries in the middle
um if we look at the next one you can see the BA build here with the uh fiber optic spool on the
bottom,

the the batteries in the middle, and then the anti-tank warhead on the top. Um the uh the PG7VL,
which is the best single round uh RPG, but as we know from Gaza, single round RPGs need to be very
specifically hit on a Nom troop carrier or a merk of a tank um in order to destroy the tank. There's
lots of ways to hit it for mobility kills that make it unable to drive. Um but in terms of
destroying the tanks, which we saw last week on the show when the soldiers left the hatch open, um
that was exploited. Um but we know from Gaza that the single rounds um aren't uh there they could be
stopped most times by um the armor on the mark of a tank. And so we've seen the tanks be less
targeted. we're going to watch on this program a number of times where the tanks are bypassed to hit

smaller uh softer targets and to hit troops uh as well. And that kind of battlefield adaptation um
is really taking its toll on the Israelis. Um let's take a look at number seven here. Um so that
just showed you those last two pictures shows you what you're going to see crashing into these
things in these next videos. So, I wanted to put those in there so you could see it again through
the destroyed town. This is near Bintage Bale. Uh, [snorts] again, uh, stalking through the town.
You're going to see it identify here three troop carriers and you're going to see the two of them
with their backs to the buildings because they're backing right up into the building and letting the
soldiers walk into the building from there. So he passes on that NMR and he sees this one with a
rear door exposed and that is a weak point. Hitting the rear door

is an effective spot to hit with a single round RPG, particularly with these high-end um Iranian
rounds that are being delivered here. So these are smart targeting. You know, sometimes earlier in
the war, we saw them um crashing them into the armor of the front armor of the tanks. Um and very
quickly they have adapted. You can see that's a direct hit. That's the last drone shot. It's going
through the door um on the back of the tank which is not fully uh sealed. Um let's look at number
eight here. Coming over the top to hit this uh hilltop position in the western sector. uh a new uh a
newly uh positioned base here that they're going to circle around and come back uh and chase a
soldier off of his uh armored vehicle. And Hezbollah writes on their field reports every day uh at
the end. They say the Islamic resistance is committed to

defending its land and its people, especially as the enemy, Israeli enemy crosses boundaries with
its criminality. Again, you're going to see the drone drop right out of the sky as soon as it sees
the soldiers. You're going to see the soldiers on that tank see that it's coming and the tank
crewman there jumping off. Um we can show the next one that just shows u the direct um the dive down
here onto the tank and again skipping the tank and going for uh the soldier itself. uh a development
in tactics that we have seen uh this week and it's just remarkable the improvements um on the
battlefield and the awareness of the Hezbollah uh pilots. Let's look at the next one. It's just got
a um a still of him uh jumping off of the tank this week. I'm going to tell you the Israelis this
week admitted to one fatality amongst their soldiers and

11 wounded in FPV attacks. And we say it all the time on this show, but those numbers do not add up
with what you're going to be watching on this show. They don't even add up to what we've seen uh in
these first few videos. But uh let's take a look at number 11 cuz they're going to chase some more
soldiers here near um again this is in uh Baya uh on the coast. You can see the Mediterranean in the
distance there. There's a tank in the bottom right corner. He flies right by that tank. Uh, and here
he's going to hone in on the headquarters of the 146th Division, which is based in Baya. And it is,
uh, here you're going to see the troops. They don't seem to hear the drone, which is possible when
you, anyone who's been around a Merk of a tank knows that you can't hear anything around it.

It's possible the tanks are running. Uh, but the situational awareness of these troops seems to be
limited. Although um they did talk uh in Harets today in the newspaper about how the soldiers have
two things to do when the drones come duck and prey. That was the uh the Haret story with officers
from the field. Um so you can see those soldiers there. The next slide I'll show you is where
they're targeting. And again, even if that it does look like that drone is about to clip the wall
there, but that's going to detonate the anti-tank round, which is a piercing round. um firing on
those um those targets there. And also um just this week uh Secretary General of Hezbollah, Shik
Naim Kasum uh he said to the commander to our commanders, our field officers and all fighters in all
areas of the battlefield. Your drone attacks embrace the land and choke the occupier.

Your drones terrorize the evildoers and tyrants of the earth. your missile strikes shake their lives
and they live in anxiety and psychological crisis. This has been the thing that Hezbollah has been
pushing on um with their psychological operations externally but also internally to their own
fighters to remind this remind you of a period of victory. Um, you know, like Nasalla used to say,
"I promised you victory before." Um, and that was the 2000 victory. And then Nasalla would say that
over and over again. I promised you victory um after each battle that Hezbollah won in 2000 and then
in 2006. Uh again, let's take a look at number 13. Um now this is a target on an Iron Dome uh air
defense system which is uh Israel's primary defense against Hezbollah weapons, rockets uh primarily
rockets, artillery rockets um but also drones. They talked um after the first few weeks of the war.
There you

see the Iron Dome launcher. You can see um the launch uh the missiles in the top there and it's
directly onto that launcher destroying it um which is going to cost um at least a couple million
dollars uh if it's loaded. You can see it's loaded with um with 18 missiles of the 20 missiles. So
that's another nearly $2 million. So let's let's call it a $4 million hit with this $200 drone that
we're [clears throat] watching. This is now the day after. And the drone goes back to the same site
and finds the soldiers replacing the launcher, their mobile launchers. You see the launcher on the
left there is going to replace it. And you see nine soldiers here uh underneath the uh Hezbollah
drone and it lands in between the group of them. Um so it's pretty uh remarkable to be targeting
these Iron Dome systems and Israel was really panicked about it.

Channel 13 said, "The most dangerous thing is that Hzbollah started to focus on Iron Dome systems
themselves." Um, the Israelis said that they had used Iron Dome 27 times as of May 1st to intercept
drones. So, they're using $100,000 Tammer uh interceptor missiles uh against these $200 drones. Um,
we can look at the next slide and you can see the launcher uh that was hit which is 14. There you
can see the launcher. You can see at the top there that's four rows um of five uh missiles in each
interceptor missiles. And you can see that three looks like three maybe four of them have been
fired. Uh and that is hit directly with an anti-tank warhead. it will destroy, as we saw in the
second video, the next day, it completely destroyed that launcher. Um, and these drones, as I've
mentioned a bunch of times, while they're on their offensive mission, they're also reconnaissance

drones because the entire flight is a reconnaissance flight until it becomes an attack. Um, and so
Hezbollah is shown that they they have shown before the FPV era that they had intelligence on all
these Israeli positions. We watched that for two years during the genocide in Gaza when Hezbollah
was a support front that they they knew what they were hitting in each of these places. They knew
what each Israeli base uh had on it. And now they have these um you know 10 operations a day of uh
FPV drones that are collecting data the whole time that they're flying. Um so they're able to pick
off things like these launchers which are mobile. the the Iron Dome system is a mobile launcher
system. They're not fixed. They move them all over the place. They even put them on uh ships. Um and
so they're not always in the same spot. They move around. Hezbollah sees

them on their drones and picks them off and takes a $4 million hit out of the uh US funded Israeli
allowance, I guess we'll call it. Um and then the uh uh 15 just shows the nine soldiers there. Uh
and they're on the left hand side there. You see the uh the new launcher system that's going to
replace the one that got uh destroyed. Let's take a look at 16. This is a an FPV strike firsterson
view is the FPV. Um you're going to see it coming right down here on this tank. It's going to target
the commander hatch. You're going to see it deliver right into the commander hatch there. Um that is
a weaker spo a weaker spot. Um, we've seen that hatch open. Of course, we saw the hatch open in Gaza
and handd delivered through the hatch. Um, but Hezbollah is clearly uh understanding the hatch.
There you see the perfect

shot of the hatch. That on the left side is the hatch um that they pop their heads out of. And it is
not as sealed and doesn't have as many layers um of armor uh and reactive armor um uh as the rest of
the tank. So that's why uh it's one of the top one of the places that they aim for. And the Israelis
have a call sign for when they hear this. I talked about it last week. They call it an air hammer.
And out over their radios, they send a warning that it's an air hammer. And like I said, Haret said
the two things that soldiers do when they hear air hammer is duck and prey. Um let's look at number
17. Going to chase uh some more soldiers on this same base up here on the top of this mountain near
Nakura. This is on the western coast. Um, this is a

previous IDF position, long-term position on the border. So, now they're striking on the Israeli
side of the border here. Uh, and you're going to see this drone circle around. And if you look at
the bottom right, you're going to see soldiers running right there. They get the Hezbollah circles.
You can see them go into the hanger. And the drone chases them into the hanger. And it's going to
detonate in the hanger uh, and send the piercing charge through that underground area. And again,
one fatality, 11 wounded in all of these operations, according to the Israelis. This is in the
Western 46th Division is a reserve division that is in charge of uh this area of responsibility. So,
this is a reserve unit getting hammered. Um let's take a look at 18. This is a uh shot on a uh
helicopter base, a staging base you could say. The drone's going to come down. You see

the soldier fleeing. Some talk that he was fleeing into a washroom. I think those are their
makeshift uh bomb shelters, but [snorts] uh for his sake uh you wouldn't want that to be the
washrooms. Um but he uh is a tank transporter battalion uh leader that was hit there. That's near
Schlomi. Again, you can see how they have coverage over this whole base. You can see how there's
cars there. So the cars, the soldiers drive up to the bases in their car and then they're and then
they're dispatched from this kind of staging ground uh into the occupation. There's a a helipad uh
as well there. Let's take a look at number cuz this is a uh we saw this in Gaza as well. Um using a
servo motor to uh release to drop the munition. The munition is what you're seeing uh at the bottom
there. That's the new fuse that Hezbollah has uh

adapted to the end of this round. And this isn't going to be an anti-tank round. This is going to be
a fragmentation warhead. The anti-tank round creates a a piercing dart. Um and this round is going
to be a fragmentation round which blows like a grenade. Um and you can see why you would use that
type of warhead on this. This is technical gear at an Israeli base. they drop on it and seem to hit
it dead uh in the area. And if it is a fragmentation warhead, the the uh shrapnel will spray out and
destroy all of that gear, which we're going to see that happening on this video uh in a moment here.
The last scene will show the next day um that the uh here it is that the the gear has been moved.
So, um, we have a bunch of these each week where they're picking off these, um, you know,

pretty significant deep intelligence to get these kind of targets. Um, so that was in uh, Rasal Bay
as well. Um, let's look at 20 now. Um, this is in Bintage Bale. You could see the roads all dug up
again and they make their own paths because they're scared to drive on the roads fearing that they
are um that there's IEDs. Here you get another perfect example. Tank tank on the left, uh tank on
the right, uh troop carrier on the left, two bulldozers, and a tank in front. And he's going to
circle around. Uh he has all of these options to hit. He's also looking in that house to see if
there's anyone moving in that house. But then he's going to turn, come back, and hit the D9 armored
bulldozer, which is the the target to hit in this circumstance with those targets cuz you're going
to destroy the D9 armored bulldozer entirely with

this warhead that is delivered right into the cockpit. Um, so they lose another D9 armored
bulldozer, which is a genocide tool. It's really there's no other purpose for a D9 bulldozer than
genocide. Uh let's look at number 21. Here we have one of these thermal. There's an anti-tank guided
missile strike. A cornet strike. You can see the tank there burning. Um we're watching this on
thermal camera at night. There's a second cornet anti-tank missile strike on a tank. And you can see
that tank burning there as well. Um, and now you're going to see uh a complex operation. This is the
Israelis trying to, you can see their spotlight trying to um figure out what's going on after
they've got two burning tanks and now artillery is being launched at them along with a smoke screen
from their tanks. Um, their tanks can uh hold the smoke screen um with their exhaust and they pump

it out from there. You're going to see them here hit with a few more mortars uh in this period of
time uh before the fire. There you see them uh fired down on the troops and you're going to see the
third uh anti-tank guided missile strike there and again burning vehicle. Um this is on the western
coast now. You're going to see footage. This is from sewer um from Ty in South Lebanon shot by
Lebanese civilians showing the tanks that are burning in that case. So significant multi-layered
operation there in um uh Russell Baya. Let's look at 22. Another uh really smart target. This is
going to target an O of uh which is a command and control vehicle. Uh it's not your everyday tank.
It's built on the uh hull of a Merkova tank. Um but it is it has enhanced electronic warfare and
jamming systems in there. and they put it right through

the open back door which would completely blow up that uh entire um uh command and control
capability the network capabilities that those use those effects they have only a limited number of
them and that is just that is uh prime targeting uh and this is what we're seeing in now week 10 uh
total command by the pilots um and also of the targeting of what to choose to target not not only
the flying uh not only the attacking but what's the subject of the targeting. Um when we compare
this to the first week um remarkable development that has the Israelis still week after week
scrambling. Um let's look at 23 cuz this is the one that everybody wants. Everybody want everybody
asks me why they don't send two cameras so that we can see battle damage assessment. Um and I think
the simple answer for that is um it's just too many drones. But you're

going to see the merk of a tank there. And you can see it's um its cannon is pointing up. Its main
gun is pointing up and they're putting that drone into that hole, which is an effective place to hit
it if you're going to hit a tank. You can see how it's lifted up there. And now here's the second
drone going to show you that first drone hit. And there, that's what it looks like when the tank
gets hit. Um, but I just don't think when you're fighting a battle for uh an existential battle, a
battle for survival, um I don't think you have the the uh the luxury of doubling up just so people
can see um the aftermath, but you can see it's a significant strike on the tank and the tank did not
defeat that round. There's no question about that. Um so there's there's two cameras for the people
who ask

for it, but I don't think it's something that uh Hzbollah will do uh very often. Although they did
it this morning, I was editing that in the green room before coming on. Um, they did show us from
multiple camera angles and when they do that, it's definitely a devastating uh military media
intervention. Let's look at 24 now. Again, uh this is in Rasal Bay. You can see the coast uh off in
the distance there. It's targeting a reserve battalion and they're going to come in down on this
marova tank and again targeting the door. Um so we're not seeing at all this week anything uh
targeting the armored front uh the armored top. Um there it is. It goes directly through the door
and when this last frame freezes you're going to see it freeze on that right on the door. So that is
a perfect hit. The pilots are good. Um the Israeli military

said that the pilots are spread out across all the front line. They're not in their normal um unit.
Uh they're not in the air the air force of Hezbollah, their drone unit. Um but they're rather
embedded within all of the different infantry units. So um they have these all across the front
lines and there's a direct hit on the back door of that marova. Um, let's go 25 because we see
Humvees here being targeted and these are also good targets. We saw in Gaza anytime uh we saw a
single round RPG be fired in Gaza they were firing them at these uh these Humvees because of course
the genius in Gaza was that they were firing Yasin 105s and those were tandem charged. they had two
uh charges in each warhead and if those could be used in these circumstances they would be effective
um because they have the two rounds. So there's the destruction

of that Humvey and we know that the Americans last week I reported on the American airbridge of
weapons and we watched these Humvees and Hammets come off the trucks uh or come off the ships I
should say um replacing all of these so that Israel can continue its genocide. But taking out these
hum these Humvees that are already in in Lebanon at forward positions, this is massively disruptive
for the ability of the Israelis to fight if they were trying to fight uh instead of just attacking
civilians. Um let's look at 26. Another one in Rasal Baya. Uh another one versus a tank. You see a
whole group of them there that are shown. This one's going to hit the track of the tank. Possible
mobility kill when you hit the track. Um, you're going to see it come down here. I think he maybe
misses the door by a little bit, but he's aiming for

the door. And once that round detonates, it's going to send a piercing shot through that door. uh in
any case and it's also going to destroy the tread um the track on that uh armored vehicle. Let's
look at 27. Now, this is uh what I thought we would start seeing more of and I think we will see
much more of in the coming weeks. This is an attack on a forward base. And rather than attacking the
armored vehicles parked in front of the forward base, um, Hezbollah is going to put this drone
through the living room window of the base. Um, which puts the anti-tank round uh into you'll see
the the round will detonate off the window and um will send its pierce and its shrapnel into the
base. So perhaps the base is empty or perhaps Israel's lying about their uh casualties. Um I tend to
think it's the latter. Um let's look

at 28. Now we're going to go into the riverbed uh the Latani riverbed near Darion here. So we're now
back up in the um top of the Galilee panhandle. And you can see using this riverbed, Israel is
trying to use this riverbed as cover, which you can see they're going to fly over a number of
vehicles here uh in the valley. Again, just beautiful South Lebanon um being destroyed by a
genocidal uh entity that doesn't seem to know when to stop. turns around, comes back and heads down
into the valley where there is a land rand land rover command jeep. Look on the back. It's bristling
with uh intelligence, surveillance, um satellite, radar. You see it hit that. Um that's usually a
command vehicle and that is a significant loss because that is how they organize their network
connectivity through their different uh vehicles. And you can see on the back there, it's just uh

lit with uh antennas, cameras, uh satellite, radar. So, significant hit there. Um are we on 27
tomorrow? Yes. No, we're on 29. I'm with you. Uh so there we saw Jeep hidden Humvey hidden there.
He's going to come back around on it. Um, this one is the tent. They're going to hit the tent. And
this is interesting because Israel is thinking that the solution, see the tent there, and they've
got the they've got to trying to conceal it there. Um, that is a base and rather than the jeep, he's
going to go and hit on that base. Presumably, there's troops underneath there. Uh, and a direct hit
on it. Um, and Israel today said that the IDF has uh sent to Lebanon 158,000 square meters, which is
basically 20 soccer fields or football pitches depending on where you are in the world, uh, of
netting. And the idea is that they're going to put netting

all over everything. Um, which is something that they do in um, the war in in Ukraine. They use
fishing nets. Um, and it's not totally clear to me. They use different weapons on the drones in um,
uh, in Ukraine than they are here with Hezbollah. If these Hezbollah rounds get tangled up in the
net, it should be enough power based on the speed that the um that the quadcopter is flying, it
should be enough power to trigger the fuse um, and detonate. So, I don't think these uh I don't
think these screens are going to be uh the savior that Israel is banking on, but we will uh reserve
judgment on that until we see uh more operations against those nets. That's the first time we saw
that this week um passing on vehicles entirely and hitting uh troop positions. Let's look at number
30 because this is going to get uh a soldier in

a house. Again, remember one soldier killed 11 wounded in this entire week in uh Hezbollah FPV drone
operations according to the Israelis. So, it's going to fly around here and you're going to see
standing out on the balcony there. Oh, sorry, this side. Yeah, there he is. Uh Israeli soldier
unlikely alone in that house. So, he's out on the he's being a soldier in a window for the rest of
his group. And the uh pilot is going to take it around perpendicular and go right through the front
window into that base. Um this is in Taipei again on the northern uh northwestern part of the
Galilee panhandle. So, into a uh into a house of soldiers. Um this is what we've seen now. This is
the fourth one in this uh pack alone. And I've already there's been multiple um that you'll see on
next week's show cuz uh we have as you know our

cuto off deadline is Wednesday. We can't uh we have to have a production window. So these are
Wednesday to Wednesday. So next week you will see um the the operations from the past from today and
yesterday will be the beginning of next week's show. And previously I was saying like these
operations were 2 weeks old. They're not that way anymore. We're getting these the day after in a
lot of cases. Sometimes we get them the same day. The most is 2 days after. So these operations that
you're watching are actually operations from this past week. Whereas in previous uh resistance
reports, we were talking about operations that were 2 weeks uh in some cases previously. So uh
that's an an advance too that we're watching. So let's look at 31. We've got another thermal uh
operation here. If you can look at the circles on the left hand side there and now in the middle

you're going to see uh little soldiers uh start to run um they're tracking in this I tracked at
least a dozen cuz you can see there's some more coming running down the hill to go into that house.
So now we've seen half a dozen at least and then if you see to the right you can see a few more are
coming. Uh yeah, there's another bunch of them. So we're looking at and then there's three more
coming from the from the right. There's another one coming. Uh they're all running down the hill.
Now we're upwards of 15 just that we've seen with our eyes enter this building. And here comes an
anti-tank guided missile strike. Cornet, the tank killer unit, uh firing on a uh Israeli military
troop position. possible thermabaric there. I think we would see a little more uh if it was
thermabaric. It's very tough to tell with the thermal because we

don't get enough shots to really tell, but the the cornet has a thermabaric warhead which would just
make a a mess of that uh Israeli position. Um let's look at 32 now. Again on the coast again
battering the same uh division on the coast. This is going to be another Humvey here. Circling
around back to hit the Humvey that in the back of that Humvey is covering up um technical gear as
well. And directly onto the hood that explodes. The Humvey explodes. It's completely out of service.
Uh another destroyed one. And this week alone, I I I marked them all down. Tanks and APCs took 30
FPV drones and six anti-tank guided missiles. Humvees and other vehicles like those Land Rovers, the
vehicles that were instantly destroyed, they took 19 at, you know, half a million to a million a
piece. Um the D9 U bulldozers and excavators took 15 FPV strikes. Troops took 50.

So, we're now seeing more troops being targeted than we're seeing vehicles uh here in week 10. One
against the Iron Dome, six against gear and equipment. Um and then we also saw um upwards of 50
rocket and artillery operations which are complementing these drone operations all the time. And we
talk about the drone operations because they have videos on them and we can break down the videos.
Um but the rocket ops are uh a consistent part. They match all of these operations. Afterwards,
after they're hit by the drones, they'll fire artillery on the same spot when um when troops are
gathered around there. So, let's take a look at 33 cuz these are going on all week. This is the
Hezbollah Sed 107 drone. You're going to watch it with the air piston uh launch, which reduces its
uh heat signature for the Israelis that are trying to track it. And these drones are coming

across the border uh constantly every day um across the border, but also on Israeli troop positions
in Lebanon. There's a good shot of it flying and we've seen those flying across the border. The
Hezbollah shows them flying up to the border and then uh Israelis in the north uh often show us them
flying because these defeat uh air defense systems. These often have to be shot down with
helicopters. Um, so these are very effective weapons that are constantly being used. Hasbollah
built. And then this last one here is uh um this this goes uh this artillery man firing from the
bush uh reminded me of when I visited uh South Lebanon uh after the 2006 war and uh somebody said to
me that uh all the rocks are Hezbollah and it was a reference to even the rocks are Hezbollah which
is a reference to when Hezbollah used to hide uh audio systems recording systems

for troops. s in the rocks or the rocks were IEDs. Uh in this case, even the trees are Hezbollah. Uh
this artillery man firing from the bush. Uh and all you would see from the outside is a mortar
flying out of the trees. So even the trees are Hezbollah. So this has been the resistance report for
day 951 of Israel's genocide in Gaza and day 73 of Hezbollah's defense of South Lebanon.
