Title: Iran spearheads coordinated resistance to US-Israeli war, with Jon Elmer
Date: 2026-04-02
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FBxSyj3KHas
Caption source: YouTube auto-captions, English original
Note: earlier context

You are watching and listening to the Electronic Intifada. I am John Elmer. This is the resistance
report for day of Israel's genocide in Gaza. Uh it's day 34 of the US and Israeli war with Iran, day
31 of the IDF's attempt to annex South Lebanon, all of which I will be covering on this week's
resistance report. We'll cover all those fronts uh and week five of the war. Let's get right into it
and look at the uh Strait of Hormuz here where Trump uh told everybody yesterday that we have
nothing to do with this. So, uh there there doesn't appear to be an American plan um to run a a
suicide gauntlet uh through this area. So, uh for now anyway, um they don't appear to be interested
in that and because of that, um the Strait of Hormuz is now uh essentially a toll uh a toll booth uh
taking uh rials, Iranian currency

for their crude, which is undermining the sanctions regime. Um and just another element uh of Iran
turning the US strategy uh on its head here. According to the Israelis, they've dropped 16,000 bombs
on Iran. The US says 12,000 targets, which means many more than 16,000 bombs. And of course, their
targets uh like all wars, the ICRC spoke this week and said that 295 health, medical, and emergency
centers have been targeted, 600 schools, 17 Red Crescent medical centers, 48 civil defense vehicles,
46 Red Crescent ambulances have been destroyed, and three Medevac helicopters destroyed. And uh of
course, the uh Americans are now starting to target key infrastructure, destroying critical bridges,
um and a vaccine medical science uh factory just uh before we were coming on air. But again, this
vi- this image, this satellite image of the topography of the strait um of the Iranian mainland that
we're looking at in the north, high hills, much

overwatch, um very difficult for any uh enemy warship to run that gauntlet. And the American
military appears to have convinced Trump that that is simply not going to happen. Let's look at the
next slide cuz we showed this last week as well, but it's a good way to see the size of the strait.
Iran's National Security Committee has approved a bill that would impose fees on ships passing
through the Strait of Hormuz. The official uh Fars News Agency reported, citing a committee member,
the bill when it becomes law would impose a toll in rials, which would reverse the currency collapse
that the United States imposed upon Iran uh earlier this year in the lead-up to the war. It would
ban the passage of US and Israeli uh vessels through the strait and assert Iran's sovereignty over
the strategic waterway and ban any country that imposes unilateral sanctions against Iran. Uh The
Economist had a banger

headline this week, "How Iran is making a mint out of Donald Trump's war." So, the premier
capitalist newspaper uh and oldest uh "How Iran is mak- is making a mint from Donald Trump's war."
Iran is richer, they're ex- porting more oil, they're exporting it at a higher price, they're
trading in Iranian currency through the uh Hormuz toll booth. All of these things are uh positives
for Iran amidst this war and overthrowing the American strategic objectives in this war. Um let's
take a look at the next map because this week also uh the Yemeni armed forces joined the war and uh
proposed the um closing of the Bab el-Mandeb, which you can see on this map is in the bottom left
corner there. That is the choke point uh off the Yemeni coast running up through the Red Sea, which
would effectively cut off the Suez Canal and force uh all traffic around Africa, which it

actually already is because of the insurance rates from the previous Yemeni battle in the Red Sea
with the US when the US fled uh and didn't want any part of that. Shipping has largely um moved uh
out and around Africa instead of sailing through this. Although, you can see uh the tanker. This is
as of last week, the tanker build-up uh at Yanbu, which is um the Saudi port on the Red Sea. Um and
let's take a look at uh Yahya Saree from the uh Yemeni armed forces announcing this on the weekend.
He said um that the implementation of what was stated in the previous statement of the Yemeni armed
forces regarding the direct military intervention in support of the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
resistance fronts in Lebanon, Iraq, and Palestine, and in the view of the continued military
escalation, the targeting of infrastructure, and the commission of crimes and massacres against our

brothers in Lebanon, Iran, Iraq, and Palestine, the Yemeni armed forces have carried out their first
military operation with a batch of ballistic missiles which targeted sensitive sites in the Israeli
enemies' heartland. Um this operation coincided with the heroic operations carried out by the
brothers, the fighters in Iran has and in Hezbollah in Lebanon, and the operation successfully
achieved its goals. Our operations will continue until the announced goals are achieved as stated in
the previous statement by the Yemeni armed forces until the aggression on all resistance fronts
ceases. And that first operation on the weekend was multiple Yafa drones, long-range drones, cruise
missiles, um and a couple of Palestine two ballistic missiles, which are Khaibar Shekan, um that the
Iranians as well use. Um let's take a look at some of the assets that the US has lost. We covered
this last week with the air defenses, but uh Reuters did a nice little graphical picture

of of what the US has lost. The F-15 Strike Eagles, um three of those were shot down by um Kuwaiti
uh fighter pilots, friendly fire. Um one of them was clipped by Iranian air defenses, the F-35A that
you see there, the Lightning II. It was clipped as well, the first time the F-35 has been clipped in
battle. It had to do uh do an emergency landing, and the pilot was um wounded by shrapnel in that
operation. Um and we have another near miss this week. We've got audio in on this. This is an F-18
that is strafing um the uh eastern shoreline of Iran, and you're going to hear the fighter jet
strafe, and then you're going to see uh uh shoulder-fired uh Misagh uh anti-aircraft uh man-portable
anti-aircraft system fired at it. So, 5B here. S- doesn't get much closer than that. So, almost had
an F/A-18 lost, and you could see that strafing

run um when he's firing when it's firing for its cannon along the shoreline, that becomes a
predictable route. And in guerrilla air defense, um when you're setting up air defense ambushes,
that's the way um that you can make them possible. When you are on a predictive route, if you're
running that low-level strafing rate um that's happening here along the coastline, the the jets are
in uh predictable position, and that allows the integrated air defense systems to set up ambushes in
a particular targeted zone rather than the umbrella defense that um we are familiar with with the
Americans and the Israelis. So far, um it's been pretty effective. At least it's shown that it can
be effective. I'm not sure we're going to hear it when uh fighter jets are are dropped from the sky.
The Americans' lying, CENTCOM's lying in this war has been um really remarkable even for somebody
who covers uh military lies

for a living. It's been remarkable. Um let's take a look at the next one cuz we know that they've
lost um a number of these KC-135 Stratotankers. These are strategic aerial refueling tankers. Um
there was seven of them uh before this week, and a couple more were clipped on the runway um at uh
Prince Sultan airbase in Saudi um just the other day. And we know at the bottom there, you can see
the Reaper drones. The um the US has admitted to a couple of dozen Reapers shot down. One k- uh
Reaper kill was on the tarmac at Muwaffaq al-Salti airbase in Jordan. Um I think the numbers are
higher. The Israelis admit to losing 20 drones so far. So, we're talking several dozen at least from
the Americans. Um and from the Iranian side, they put the number significantly higher, up around
100. Um so, we'll see when um the accounting all gets made

cuz we know that these numbers are being covered up. And let's take a look at the next video cuz you
can see a couple of those uh interceptions of MQ-9 Reapers um that look a lot like uh the 358 weapon
that was being used in um Yemen to take down two dozen of them. There's a pair of Reapers from this
week that you see being hit uh by the integrated air defense system. So, that is the uh Iranian army
as well as the IRGC. You could take a look at the next one. You can see a I don't know, few billion
dollars in radars that have been destroyed. Um you can see the massive top one for um that's part of
the THAAD system and an early warning radar in Al Udeid Airbase in Qatar. It was a billion dollars
the bottom one um that you see there and the top one's a half a

million multiple they've lost multiple of them. Some reports suggest as many 10 as 10 of these
serious advanced warning radars have been knocked out. That just puts holes in the aerial defense
system. It doesn't break the system entirely. The US still tracks with satellites a lot of the
launches but they use these stronger radars in the early warning stage to set up the knock-on radars
the smaller radars that have less capacity. If these early warning radars give them a proper
location trajectory then these weaker radars are successfully able to intercept. If they don't get
the early warning accurate then the smaller radars closer to the ground they're not able to to react
in time and I think we're seeing some of that both in the shortness of sirens before the missiles
arrive in Israel and just straight up the number of missiles that are hitting. Israel talks about
95% interception rate and it's clearly not

even close to that. Um if it is half I think I would be surprised at even that number based on the
number of missiles that are being launched at Israel and the number of that we're seeing hit. Again
those numbers are unclear. We will track those whenever we can to get those figures more solid and
let's take a look at number 10 cuz this week's major hit was the US AWACS the the advanced early
warning airborne and control airplanes and you can see them there. This is from the Prince Sultan
Airbase and I told you before the war started that the US had concentrated their forces onto three
key bases Prince Sultan here in Saudi Arabia, Muwaffaq al-Salti in Jordan and also in Ben Gurion and
presumably in on airbases in Israel as well. If you look at the front if you follow from the top
left follow the runway down to the bottom right.

The last ones you see there are the E-3 Sentries and these are the airborne early warning systems
and command. These are very important aircrafts for monitoring the entire battlefield. The US only
has 16 of these in total but they only have eight that are working at any given moment and you can
see on the runway there in one airbase they have six of them. Well this week let's take a look at
one in in flight and this is actually literally this is it on the on the on the airbase at Muwaffaq
al-Salti. You can see the massive radar system there and here it is flying in this is actually
footage of the plane that was hit. This is done by airplane spotters in the US that tracked this was
landing at Tinker Airbase I think it's in Arizona. Um and so they they tracked this airplane and if
we look at the next slide this

is the same airplane. Um This is the launch by the IRGC of the drones targeting Prince Sultan
Airbase. I got ahead of myself there a little bit but you can see here the multi launch of the
Shahed drones very accurate very difficult to shoot down launched here in a clear swarm we're seeing
rail launchers looks like six or eight deep here launching a massive barrage targeting Prince Sultan
Airbase. They said this is part of the 84th wave and they said they destroyed anti-missile systems
and the penetration of solid and liquid fuel missiles into the they'll call it Al Kharj base the
Prince Sultan Airbase the location of fuel and supply fleet and aerial support targeted with a
barrage of missiles and drones. So those are the drones. Now let's take a look at the next slide and
you can see how that plane that you just saw flying into its airbase at home not in

very good shape and you can see directly hit on the radar of the of the plane. CENTCOM said that
planes were quote unquote damaged. They were damaged on the runway and we know the last time they
said that Trump went on and said they they're they're a backup in the air. So this is damaged. This
is significantly more than damaged and it's also a direct hit on the radar which is just shows that
they know and you can see here from a different angle basically cutting the plane in half. These are
really old these are really old planes they use old engines they are more than 50 years old and they
do not have a deep stock of these. Like I said they have 18 total that they cannibalize for parts
for the other eight to nine that are operational and this attack that's believed that a second one
was hit as well along with

several KC-135 Stratotankers. Is this 15? [clears throat] Are we on 15? Yeah. Um So very valuable
asset multi-billion dollar assets difficult to put a price on the AWACS because they are have been
maintained to stay in the air for so long. Um 50 years so it's long past their price point but it's
more than a billion dollars to replace for sure. Um and so again taking a significant toll on US
military assets in a way that we have not seen in a war since I mean presumably since the Second
World War. I don't know where you can take out these multi-billion dollar assets in in previous wars
even Vietnam or maybe Korea. Um but we're talking going back multiple generations before we can find
losses like this and as Trump likes to say um no one's ever seen it before. Okay let's take a look
at the map and targets again same map as always

again we're looking key targets Bahrain fifth fleet the naval command for CENTCOM that you can see
there right across the shore from Iran. The UAE is taking the most attacks UAE number one ally with
Israel. Um Qatar's Al Udeid Airbase that is the CENTCOM's key Airbase Muwaffaq al-Salti in Jordan
that you can see that's the one dead center in the middle of Jordan on the map there in the upper
left corner. We're looking at a map of the region for people listening. Um And of course Prince
Sultan Airbase you can see it there just outside of Riyadh in Saudi Arabia. Kuwait is being hammered
so much that all of the red circles can't fit in Kuwait. There's a number of US bases that were used
as hubs during the global war on terror and the war on Iraq that started in the 1990s. Um those
bases have been hammered and are largely not functioning. Of

course we know that the soldiers have been hid in um hid in hotels and the New York Times had a
banger headline the other day that said placing US troops in Middle Eastern hotels may violate laws
of war. So they think that that might be a violation to put to use human shields intentionally to
hide your soldiers who are supposed to be on military bases but instead are in five-star hotels in
the Gulf. Um so all that has been consistent and on our next slide we're going to show you I did a
mix for you of all of the launches daytime launches by the IRGC in week five. Uh in this past week
since you last saw me. So let's go to that 17. So a pair of Sejjils there there's a Fattah you see
going off. Um that's a Ghader with a multiple submunition warhead. Um And there's some more Fattahs
being launched. Khaibar

Shekan Um and again the IRGC talked this week multiple times about the Lebanese Hezbollah resistance
in the Islamic resistance in Iraq and Yemen carried out more than 120 successful and effective
operations in recent hours against the northern and southern regions of the occupied Palestinian
territories and deployed and the deployment and hideout headquarters of American commanders in
central and northern Iraq dealing attrition inducing blows to the exhausted body of the aggressor
armies. And you can see in these launches that that Iran puts out all the time they don't see every
single launch. Um but it gives you a sense of of what it looks like about all of the puts lie to
everything basically Trump said in his speech and the Israelis they say that they've knocked out 95%
of these but every day we see them launched from various locations. We see the fighters there
there's a good shot of an Emad with a maneuverable

re-entry vehicle on those. There's another Fattah. That could be a Kheibar Shekan, solid fuel,
either way they're both solid fuel. Um and there's another Ghader and they have uh the multiple
warheads. So, they're using and they're using these missiles. These would be considered old stock
missiles. We're still not seeing the Haj Qassem. We're not seeing very much of the Sejjil um and the
Iranians have admitted this that they have not opened all of their stores. Here we see multiple
missiles being launched uh at the same time. Um which also complicates uh interception. Um the IRGC
said that the targets for this week were mainly Israel's industrial military base, but also airbases
in Ramat Gan, Holon, and Palmachim, which is near Tel Aviv, a major uh airbase and air defense base
uh outside of Tel Aviv. And here we see is interesting shot of Israeli photographer um Yonatan
Sindel caught this. This is a Kheibar Shekan

warhead uh reentering the atmosphere in terminal flight over Israel. The maneuverable reentry
vehicle uses an electrical um electrical magnetic fins that grab the dense air at hypersonic speeds
during this terminal phase and this intense friction creates a plasma sheath um which is a natural
byproduct of the hypersonic flight and that plasma sheath significantly impacts radar detection by
altering the radar cross-section. And again, when you have these radars being knocked out and you
don't have the high-quality uh radars, then these missile these warheads, the reentry vehicles um
effectively become stealth because of the plasma sheath that absorbs radar and gives it a stealth
capability. So, this is an interesting was the first time we have seen uh airborne like this and you
can see the streaks uh coming off of it. Um that is the plasma sheath that is being created by the
intense uh speed at which it goes and the fins then try to

slow it down, grab the air um and they make it difficult to uh intercept. So, this is a Kheibar
Shekan um also that was uh going to hit the ground. Um too late for interception if you're
photographing it. Um And let's take a look at more incoming missiles. We've got one more here with
the audio in in central Israel, number 19. you could see the uh clear miss by the interceptor that
went up there to attempt to intercept them. I think Israel would call this um uh they they call that
intercepted um and that in particle debris from the interception. That's how they like to frame it
just to tell their people uh how it's going. Let's take a look at the next one cuz the IRGC Navy was
told that it was erased this week. There's Sinwar, uh Ali Larijani, and Nasrallah being put onto the
uh Hadid 110s um and this is a

one-way attack drone that was a tar- targeting the Fifth Fleet in Bahrain um and early warning
radars in Saudi Arabia. The Hadid 110 is a jet-powered suicide drone that is a sent that is
essentially a stealth drone. Um it's it's delta wing design is uh good for radar evasion. Its
maximum speed reaches 500 km an hour um which is the fastest uh of the drone category. It almost
effectively operates um like a cruise missile, weighs 30 kilo warhead um and have been doing
extensive damage throughout the Gulf. They're also very accurate. They're controlled um with a man
in the loop um to get those on target. And again, we've seen this from the IRGC throughout the
battle uh honoring their leaders, honoring uh what came before them, honoring even the strikes from
the day that they launched these missiles. We also see them poking uh Americans. Uh they they put
out one uh uh barrage

that was um dedicated to the American citizens that were murdered on the streets by ISIS agents. So,
just they have a much more aware uh politically aware of the United States clearly than the United
States is of them. If the United States had that awareness, I don't think they would have started
this war in this way that is not going to end up um the way that they intended to. Um number 21,
these are Arash drones. These are drones launched um by the uh Iranian army. These are Arash 2
drones and again, these are kind of uh split between a cruise missile and a drone. Um they said that
we targeted The army said we targeted the deployment uh These are long-range strike drones. These
were designed to target Israel. Um so, they said that um we targeted the deployment locations of the
AWACS aircraft, refueling tankers, and US bases in the region. We have

since this morning targeted the deployment location of US AWACS um and refueling aircraft stationed
at Ben Gurion Airport, the radar site for detecting the intercepted missiles and combat drones, and
the electronic warfare sites countering uh and combating drones in the UAE was hit. Um these uh
Arash 2 drones have 2,000 km range and were built specifically for enemy air defenses when they were
launched. Uh Brigadier General Heidari, the commander of the Iranian army ground forces, described
the Arash 2 as a specialized weapon designed to perform precision strikes and suppress enemy air
defenses. So, these are for long-range strikes to target Israel. And the Iranian army is taking part
in this operation. They want everyone to know that. They're firing these operations off every day.
They're also calling them waves. So, the army has waves, the IRGC has waves um and also the street
has waves. Last night was the 33rd night in a row of

people out in the streets in um all over Iran in different cities uh protesting, showing solidarity,
even though Trump said that it's too dangerous to go outside to take back your country. When he said
that they could take back their country, which clearly um uh they're they're they're in the street
for the opposite reason um and they're marking each of those nightly demonstrations. You've probably
seen footage from them. Um there's a lot of interviews of uh uh you know, vox pop people on the
street interviews from those uh demonstrations that show a wide cross-section of Iranian society,
not simply regime supporters, but all across the society and that's one thing that this war has done
as any war does. It unifies the country that is being targeted. Um let's take a look at the other
fronts. Iraq here, this is a little stitch of a few um Iraqi operations. The Iraqi resistance, we're
looking at

fighters here in a tunnel uh in their desert camo using a tunnel-born um base for their operations
carrying out the parts of the drones that are being fired targeting largely US bases in Iraq um but
also in Jordan. We've seen them target uh US base in Saudi, um in Syria as well. Um Jordan and
Kuwait. So, they're also targeting all of these. Uh That was the day of the operation and then you
can see here um the These are Shahed 101 drones that are being launched in barrages and again, I
could show you um they put out three of these a day. So, I could show you 21 of these every week.
They look pretty similar. I choose the ones that uh that um that are the most clear. There's a lot
of nighttime launches um but you can see them operating them. See them there. They have a Hadid 110
as well that they

just launched there. Um so, the uh resistance axis is also sharing weaponry across the fronts, which
we've known uh as well. We see that with Hezbollah, who I will be covering in a moment here. Um but
again, these operations have basically emptied the bases uh of US troops in Kuwait, in Iraqi
Kurdistan, in um Saudi Arabia. The attacks on Jordan, um that airbase is still um fully functioning
from all that we know um but the attacks on Kuwait are certainly um taking a toll on Kuwait. There's
no question about that. So, the um total number of operations the Iraqi resistance has executed, 870
since this war started. Um so, a remarkable level uh tempo of operations, multiple dozens of these
operations, individual operations. So, you might They might launch 10 drones. That counts as one
operation of the 870. Um but we've had them on the show every week because they're a critical pillar
of

this war as well. Now, let's move on to Hezbollah in South Lebanon. Um I think I want to start with
a map here because we talked about the topography a few times on this program. Um this map from
Reuters shows it pretty well. You can see the Litani River running there. Um and that is the area
that Israel is attempting to ethnically cleanse and destroy. They're calling it the Beit Hanoun
model. Um but you can see the way that each of the ridges in that uh in that map on the bottom left,
those lines are where the Israelis are pushing forward from. Um they're going along the coast,
they're going up in the center around Bint Jbeil, and then up along the Galilee panhandle into the
Marjayoun, and to the east of that is Khiam, um where they're attempting to take the high ground,
and you can see that high ground clearly on the map,

and this has always been Lebanon's um advantage. You know, Sun Tzu said, "Don't fight uphill." Um
and so this was always Israel's problem. Their attempt This isn't a Zionist dream that goes back to
the founding of their um of their project in the Middle East. They wanted the Litani River as the
natural border um of their northern border, which would give them overwatch uh over Lebanon and
allow and sort of curtail some of that advantage that um that the landscape holds for Lebanon, and
Hezbollah has been repelling that. They've carried out um more than 1,300 operations in defense of
this invasion. And if we look at the next slide, you can see what it actually looks like. Here's a
fighter uh up in the Marjayoun uh area, and he's holding his fist out that says, "They depart, we
remain, the land will remain ours." But if you look, he's holding a Hezbollah flag marking a

position. This is from the 25th of March. Um but if you look over the landscape, um we're showing
you a photograph that looks over the mountainous landscape um um of South Lebanon, which makes that
and that defines the fight in South Lebanon. It's an entirely different battle space than in Gaza,
um where it's urban warfare, um and so we're going to see that while we break down these operations
this week from Hezbollah, that um the distance and the topography plays a critical role in the
battle uh in South Lebanon. So, let's take a look at number 24. These are the points of advance for
the Israelis. Those five We're looking at a map from the Litani River down. This is about 10% of um
Lebanon, but it's about 600,000 people who are uh slated for ethnic cleansing and destruction um
according to the Israeli plan. And you can see these are the five positions that

Israel kept after the ceasefire or during the ceasefire. They um took these positions inside
Lebanon. They're on high ground um over to the western coast. You see one there. They're advancing
up uh that coast to Naqoura. Um and then in the middle areas, you can see they're pushing into the
center, which will meet up at the battle around Bint Jbeil that you see. That's the third one. And
then there's two more bases along the spine of the Galilee panhandle. That takes you up uh into
Marjayoun, and those are the main axes uh axes of this battle. The Israelis are pushing to the
Litani River, and the easiest way to get to the Litani River is from the tip of the Galilee
panhandle, which is the furthest most north area of Israel, and you can see that on the right side
of the map um how much uh Israel's border comes up in that area. And

they're using that to say that they have reached the Litani River, right? This is classic Israel
battle uh psyops. They They go the shortest distance to the area to touch the Litani River, and then
they say, "We have control to Litani River." But look at that map, uh the entire south is still uh
in a battle, and in actuality, the Israelis are only at the third ridge. The second ri- The first
ridge was the ceasefire ridge. They could move forward to the second ridge right away without any um
really without any resistance, because these are positions that they have held now for almost a
year. Um and then they're going up to the next ridge, which would be the third ridge line, and
that's the type of battle that you're seeing. We have five right now five Israeli military divisions
that are fighting um spread out across um South Lebanon, and that would be 100,000

troops. But uh they're not saying how full complement each division is, and we know from the
fighting in Gaza that their reserves um the reservists are not showing back up for battle, for their
recalls at anything like the number um at the beginning of the Gaza war. Um so I'm going to suggest
to you that those are not full divisions. We will see as the battle unfolds, um but Israel wants
that psyop to believe that there's 100,000 troops coming. Um But at the same time, you also have the
uh chief of staff of the Israeli military saying that we're about to collapse. Um we don't have
enough troops. He's been saying that for a long time. Um so it seems to be a bit of a race here in
Lebanon um before the end of the uh Iran war um that Israel can get as much um to steal as much land
as they can,

and in a world without international law, um they believe they can hold it. Hezbollah believed this
is an existential battle, um and they're fighting it in that way. If we look at 25, you can see um
This is the battle map according to Hezbollah, and you can see they're They match pretty much uh
match up with the previous map of what I described. They're coming The Israelis are coming up the
coast. Um They're on the western coast. Um They're They're coming up through the Bint Jbeil axis. Um
Then you can see them up in the top there in Marjayoun at the top of the Galilee panhandle. All of
those places are being hit, and then you can see the drone operations are indicated here because the
battle, the rockets, the drones, the artillery, half of it is inside Lebanon, half of it is inside
Northern Israel. They're attacking Israeli military positions that are on the

border preparing to invade Lebanon. Um and so that's how those numbers split up. This is yesterday's
battle breakdown when there was um 60-some operations. We've seen multiple We saw back-to-back days
of almost 100 operations each of the days. Um so we're seeing a significant military tempo that we
have never seen from Hezbollah before. So, they are truly fighting in an existential war as they
said. And as I said earlier, 600,000 people live in these uh villages that Israel's promising to do
to them what they did to Beit Hanoun. And we know from the previous war with Hezbollah that they've
already started. A lot of these border villages have already been completely destroyed, and they
were destroyed um during the ceasefire. Actively, Israel was doing the same thing in Gaza as they
were doing in Lebanon, destroying a um on the other side of the ceasefire line. Um so it's
significant battle that we have uh

in store in Lebanon ahead. If we look at the next map, you can see this is the Beit Hanoun The Beit
Hanoun doctrine. Um these are all This is from Reuters. This is just a a serious undercount, but
this is what we have uh confirmed as of last week of the number of power stations, hospitals, uh
water infrastructure all being targeted. Critical hospitals in in Tyre and Tyre, which is the major
city in the south, knocking out that hospital. Um Half a dozen other hospitals too in Bint Jbeil uh
as well have been targeted. So, this is the Israeli way of war. You destroy the hospitals, you
destroy the schools because you can't defeat the fighters. Um But like I said before, uh chief of
staff in mil uh in Eyal Zamir said that the IDF is going to collapse inward. "I'm raising 10 flags,"
he said during a meeting with the uh the Israeli

Security Council. He said the reserves will not hold up for a long battle. So, he is uh raising what
he said was 10 red flags about how the Israeli military at the moment is unable to fight this battle
that we haven't thought that they have been able to fight for more than a generation in Lebanon. Um
let's take a look at 27, because all of these operations are underpinned by artillery, drone, um and
rocket fire. So, here you see um fighters launching uh Iranian uh Grad rockets, Iranian-made Grad
rockets, um from these launchers, and we can see these launchers deeply buried in the same mountains
that I showed you, taking advantage of the same uh topography to fire these to fire them from deeper
inside Lebanon, which makes it safer for the fighters who are launching. Um [snorts] and Israel uh
commented this week the IDF commented this week that many of the rockets were

being fired um and strategic missiles that they have as well were being fired from north of the
Litani, um meaning that Israel's not going to be able to get at them even in their um dream scenario
in South Lebanon. Um and that's true of Hezbollah's capacity all along. There's a lot of talk about
the south um and that Hezbollah is in the south. Um Hezbollah is all through Lebanon. They have um
divisions that are beyond the Litani River. They have multiple divisions below the Litani River, but
they have multiple above it as well. They have long-distance capabilities that continued continued
to strike. Here we're seeing uh extended-range Chinese um uh heavy artillery, 122-mm heavy
artillery, and you can see the bottom fins there. That's extended range. Um it's a rocket-assisted
um artillery rounds that can cat- that can go a longer distance than standard artillery, and you can
use the topography that we're seeing here

both to hide the fighters, um but also to have the advantage of the trajectory of the launch of the
artillery. So, we're seeing something like 40 artillery rocket and drone operations, separate
operations. Again, this is a single operation where you're going to watch eight to 12 rockets
launch. These are counted as a single operation in in these terms and on two days ago's Hezbollah
had 36 rocket operations. They fired more than 4,000 rockets already, which is more than the June
2006 war. It's more than Qassam fired on the first day of um the Battle of Al-Aqsa Flood. So,
significant developments from the rocket units of Hezbollah, which the Israelis said they knocked
out last war, but now we're seeing them in the thousands and you know, quickly approaching 10,000
deployed. So, they clearly were not destroyed and their stocks are significantly higher than that.
Going into the war, they were understood to be well over

100,000. So, there's still a lot a lot of war material left with Hezbollah and that was always the
case. Hezbollah was not defeated. The ceasefire came at a time when Hezbollah repelled the invasion
of South Lebanon. Let's take a look at number 28 cuz you can see the drone swarms here. Again, these
are Hezbollah built. They're targeting an airbase air defense base here in Haifa. They show us the
map conveniently. These are Hezbollah built Sayyad 107 drones. And these are the drones that are
they fly they have an electrical engine and lower radar cross-section, no heat. They don't generate
the same heat as the piston engines and they are they make it through Israeli air defenses. This is
the weapon that was used to target the Golani base during the last war. When more than what that
left something like 70 casualties including almost 10 killed when these drones were landed on the
Golani base

just north of Tel Aviv. People may recall we broke that down on this program quite some time ago.
The the missile expert at the International Institute for Strategic Studies notes that this this
electrically powered variant, this is the result of a system with a very low signature and should be
harder to detect than the Shahed 101 or 136. The trade-off is limited range, but as we watch from
here, limited range isn't an issue when you're up on a mountain top, you have a huge asset in your
favor here and there you see it's rocket assisted and then it takes off with an electrical engine
rather than the lawnmower engine that people are familiar with for the the Shahed drones. And again,
a single we're seeing a team here launching these, but a single a single launcher a single rail can
launch all of these separate drones that we're seeing. So, they don't require significant manpower.

It's dangerous to launch them, but they're so covered in the bush that they've been able to carry
these operations out consistently. Let's take a look at 29 because we have here a fatal anti-tank
operation. A Cornet you can see there. The Cornet up on the hill firing down on Merkava tank of the
IDF. It is going to clip it here. You see it. Direct hit. Interestingly, the Israelis believe they
intercepted this. And that they were fired on twice, but we can clearly see by watching the video,
which they obviously didn't watch, that they were hit by a single shot. You can see the tank limping
away there in the smoke. And as it turns to go down the hill, you'll see the flames out the back
because it was targeted in the rear cabin and also the two storage containers that come out by the
back door are ammo storage. So, that's ammo storage that

goes up in flames. One of the tank crew was killed, four were seriously wounded on this including
two officers in this operation and that happened in just south of Bint Jbeil. Of course, Bint
Jbeil's famous for its battle in the 2006 war. Let's take a look at number 30. Another anti-tank
guided missile strike here that we're seeing. This is a multi-hour battle that we're looking at. It
was a several hours battle on Saturday with the 146th division. There we're seeing the burning tank
that was hit by anti-tank fire and you're going to see how close the fighters are in this particular
battle space because you're going to see Israeli soldiers here and we have seen in the reports a
number of face-to-face battles, close quarters battles where in these villages the battles have
happened at close quarters. And this is the one we're seeing here that lasted for many hours. You're
going to see coming

up here group of Israeli soldiers. There you see them there. Within camera shot of the Hezbollah
fighters. And seemingly separated from their armored vehicle. There's another one that you see up
top there. There has been a number of soldiers killed in these face-to-face battles. One word solid
from the IDF the other day said that four soldiers were killed and two others were wounded in a
clash with Hezbollah in Southern Lebanon yesterday. The military announces all served in the Nahal
Brigade's reconnaissance unit. In addition, another soldier was seriously wounded and a reservist
was moderately hurt in the incident. The soldiers exchanged fire with Hezbollah operatives from
close range hitting several of them. The military finds while evacuating wounded soldiers from the
gun battle, Hezbollah operatives fired anti-tank missiles at the troops, which did not cause any
further injuries. So, it sounds like the soldiers sounds like the Hezbollah fighters killed those
soldiers at point-blank range and

the Israeli military is trying to say, yeah, they killed them all and they killed them all at point-
blank range, but it sounds like they got their the Israelis fired off at least a couple of rounds
before they died, which is just surprising military propaganda to to throw that in there when your
unit gets wiped out and you say that you were able to fire back. Maybe they weren't even conclusive
about it. Let's take a look at this next one. This is an Almas top attack anti-tank guided missile
strike. You're familiar with this. We ride on the missile for these ones. You can see it locked in
on a tank there. This is again in the Bint Jbeil area. They're south of Bint Jbeil. They're not in
Bint Jbeil. They're south of it. They'll expect a major battle in Bint Jbeil. Again, aiming here.
Looks like they're aiming at the cannon. May make sense. They are

also maybe trying to stick it in the turret gap under the cannon, but the cannon is a reasonable
place to to target from that angle. And the top the top attack here, you can clearly see it's not
intercepted by the Israelis. In large measure because of the angle that it comes down on. And an IDF
soldier was killed and four were wounded in their tank by an anti-tank missile strike this week.
Another one, a separate one where they suffered serious burns. The Israeli military said yesterday
that 10 soldiers have been killed and 309 have been wounded including 25 seriously wounded. And we
know what seriously wounded means for the Israelis. very, very wounded. Usually means um usually
means no arms, no legs from what we've seen in the Gaza front. So, they're taking a toll on Israeli
fighters here in the south. Number 32, we see the birth of this tactic. We we saw this

in the previous round. We didn't see them use it against tanks. We saw them use it against um
bulldozers, lesser armored vehicles, but this is an FPV first-person view. It's driven from a video
screen and you're seeing them here hone in on a troop carrier here that they're going to come in and
come down on with the missile with a I believe what they're using is they're using a Yasin 105
warhead. They're using the tandem charged PG-7VR. And it's on the actual drone. Although with
Qassam, we have seen them use that same style, but they had a drop system that dropped it. With
these FPV drones, we seem to be seeing them using speed as their as their asset, which is necessary
because of the counter fire on it, but that's how these drones are being used. So, they're
essentially the drone is carrying the RPG round that you saw fired in Gaza at tanks.

And this is the first time we have seen that from from Hezbollah. Look at number 33. We can see it
again here. And this one seems to have a fiber optic connection because you can see it go down below
um the ground. So, what it's doing here, it's identifying new positions. So, it's actually doing
reconnaissance here and it's pointing out newly established Israeli military positions here. So,
it's it's doing a reconnaissance function for them, gaining information about where the newly set up
positions are um to take back to the artillery teams. Um and now you can see when it's done that
recon. See, it's below the ground level, which must indicate um that it's an FPV link to still be um
getting this clear uh footage. But, they're showing it here. After his recon mission, he's going to
go and hit a tank here and aim right at the back door at the at the

uh He maybe is a bit higher there, so he goes and hits in the turret ring um there. I think we
haven't seen Hezbollah's targeting um schemes. We saw Qassam released to all their fighters where to
they're trying to hit on um armored vehicles. Um and the back door is one of the places that they're
trying to hit, the cabin door um also beside the um ammo storage. So, um let's take a look at 34 cuz
we have a couple more of these to show. Um Uh again, you can sort of see the difference between the
no uh um fiber optic or not. Um this is going to come in on a Namer. This is in the Marjayoun front.
There you can see the troop carriers all piled up uh side by side. And a direct hit uh in on that
one. That was one of 95 operations on that day. That was from Wednesday.

Um So, significant. 35 is another one. Um this one heading towards the coast. You can see the
Israelis have established um Again, using human shields, parking in uh parking their tanks in
civilian neighborhoods here, using houses as cover. But, these FPV drones, when you're driving with
a video screen, um you can navigate your way through uh the civilian areas. And there's another
Namer troop carrier that's going to be hit from the 143rd division, which is fighting on the western
coast, Naqoura uh area. Again, that's a direct hit. We could take a look at the next one, 36. Uh
this is a cross-section of all these operations. So, this is a troop position uh also south of Bint
Jbeil. Um and you can see the houses being used as an Israeli military position. Um And Hezbollah
has fired anti-tank missiles at these positions a number of times um earlier this month in the town
of Mays

al-Jabal. Um Hezbollah fighters fired more than 10 anti-tank guided missile strikes um at a single
uh IDF position. I showed you that in the first week of the war. On one of their uh high grounds, um
they were hit. Multiple soldiers were killed and um more than a dozen others were injured in these
type of attacks. This next one is going to take a little bit of explanation because it is a night
operation, number 37. Um and you can see the yellows or the sorry, the red circles here that we're
looking at. We're looking at night with thermal imaging. And the red dots there are showing where
Israeli tanks are moving in a column uh into Qantara uh in the Marjayoun area. Now we're seeing um
rocket fire. So, they see that the the convoy of tanks. Now they're firing in front of the convoy of
tanks to slow its progress to make um their

targets stop. And you can see here we're watching um the village. Again, you can see the tiers of
the mountains that they're fighting in. Um you can see the benefit that the high ground has here.
So, in all around the convoy of tanks is now being hit here with rocket salvos. And then you're
going to see um this one be hit with an anti-tank guided missile strike. There you see it be hit
there. Um the fire breaks out on that particular vehicle. There were eight Merkava tanks that were
hit as part of this operation um that we're watching one of the ones that was hit. Now there you're
seeing another one up on the hilltop there. The fire breaks out on the vehicles. You can see them
burning with the thermal imaging. Um there you see a close-up of it burning behind a house. Again,
we're looking at night. Um this is a night an

overnight operation um a multi-hour operation. And now that there's chaos and confusion, now that
there's tank crewmen getting out of their burning tanks, now they're hit with another salvo of
rockets and artillery uh into the spot, creating chaos for the fighters for the soldiers that are
outside of their vehicles or trying to decide which direction to go in their vehicles. In other
words, you're watching a perfectly uh executed ambush, tank ambush uh in this village uh overnight.
And the distance makes it so that you have to uh watch this battle from afar, but most of the
viewers of this program watched uh the resistance report covering the Gaza war, and we know what
close-up anti-tank operations look like. And um so, you know that these from this distance, if you
can see them, uh you know they're significant operations. This is the Israelis putting um uh lights
uh put uh um illuminating uh flares up

um here. There you can see another rocket strike um on another vehicle of the support. This is the
reinforcements that have now come in. Um and they're being targeted. That's an Israeli light trying
to find out where the source uh of the fire is coming from. You can see it. Um and here uh the
again, the rescue forces being targeted, something we did not see in Gaza, but we do see here in
Lebanon, and we did see it before um causing significant uh issues for the Israelis when you fire on
their um their uh attempts to There's a helicopter coming in, and they're going to fire on the
helicopter, too. An air defense missile is fired at that incoming helicopter. Um again, something we
didn't see in Gaza, but that Hezbollah in this existential battle is clearly doing. And this is a
few hours later in the morning where the Israelis are covering the entire

area with smoke to withdraw their destroyed tanks um from the battle. Uh another reason why we don't
see uh the destroyed tanks, although I do have one for you um that the Israelis released, but you
can see the smoke there. A really complex and well-executed ambush um and to see it on film is the
only difference um for this because these types of ambushes are what are going on every night. And
when you read Hezbollah's um field reports from the day, you'll see the number of tanks that they
target um And all of the tanks that are targeted are not destroyed. We know some have AP um uh
active protection systems that protect them. We know sometimes the round hits a heavy part of the
tank and doesn't destroy it. Um but and we know many of them burn, and we know from the soldiers
inside that the burning um of the tanks is their

biggest fear, and it's um it's a fear that is not imaginary. It's because they have experienced it
over the past 2 and 1/2 um coming up on 3 years of war. Um let's take a look at number 38. Um
another anti-tank guided missile strike um on uh another Israeli command and control position here
that we're seeing in the Bint Jbeil area, just west of uh southwest of Bint Jbeil. And again, using
these houses, this is something that the Israelis do in the West Bank. They did it in Gaza. They
take over a civilian home um [snorts] and they use that as a base with the supposition that the
resistance doesn't know which homes they're in. Clearly a mistake in this one cuz they're going to
be fired on uh pretty significantly by Hezbollah anti-tank missiles here. You can see a direct
strike on the house. And one more, number 39. We're going to see three

Cornet strikes here intercept another tank convoy. So, here there we're seeing again thermal
imaging. Um you can see the one tank there moving. You're going to see them all clump up into three
um and they're going to be um targeted by anti-tank guided missile strikes. Um we're trying to see
it from There you see [clears throat] the the night vi- the thermal of the uh Cornet being fired
there and following its tr- its uh trajectory right directly into the tank that we're watching um
that's circled in red. Clearly hits the tank. Um And we're going to see another one. This is the
first of three that were uh hit in this particular operation. Um So, these the tempo of these
operations by Hezbollah are just really remarkable. 1,350 plus operations already, 24 days uh into
this battle. There you see two more tanks um along the same road. Um they're going to target the
tank

at the back and then the tank at the front. This is how the um the the tank massacre in the Hula
Valley happened in the 2006 war. Targeted the front of the convoy, targeted the back of the convoy,
got everybody stuck in the middle, and then just fired on all the tanks in the middle. Um that's
considered the graveyard of the Merkava that happened in uh not too far from uh from this area that
you're seeing here. Uh just a bit further up north. Um more towards Marjayoun battle space that we
were seeing. So, there again, and there's the third one being hit. And if we watch here, we're going
to see a tank crewman fleeing on foot. And I'm sure if they could see other ones if there's There he
is there. You can see him running away on foot. Hezbollah's uh helpfully put a little circle around
him as he uh tries to

find a better position than the tank that he was in that is burning. Um so, significant operation
there by Hezbollah. In the next slide, you can see the burning tank um that was released by Yedio
Ahronot. Um we know that these tanks burn. We don't um We don't see much of it, but um there's a
pretty clear shot from the battle in Lebanon. And I want to just uh wrap on um uh with Palestine. Um
the uh Saraya al-Quds released a video this week in solidarity with the axis of resistance. Of
course, this war started in Gaza. Um and the um Saraya al-Quds saluting the Yemeni people. Then,
here's Islamic Jihad founder Fathi Shikaki saying Palestine is the center of uh the struggle today
and will remain so despite um all the secret and black agreements. He's speaking about the secret
Oslo Accords that were This is Ayatollah Khamenei. Um and he's saying the fate

of the region depends on the liberation from the arrogant American hegemony and the liberation of
Palestine. Um Here you see you're going to see Yahya Sinwar giving his uh uh his famous uh speech uh
from the platform on the anniversary of the Hamas um of the founding of Hamas. He says, "We will not
hesitate to make the decision," he said. And they certainly did not hesitate to make that decision.
Abdul Malik al-Houthi from the Yemeni armed forces, he said, "Our stance continues." Then there was
Ziyad Nakala, who is the uh general secretary of Islamic Jihad. Then the missile launches that we
saw this week. And then Hassan Nasrallah is going to come in here and say the final result of this
battle and the great divine historic victory that is Netanyahu uh is that Netanyahu, Gallant, Ben
Gvir, and Smotrich are leading their entity into an abyss. We see footage from on the ground in

Gaza, some Saraya operations here, Qassam operation, and then missile strikes that we've shown you
on this program um as well. So, um that's Nasrallah now speaking saying that uh that uh the en- the
the entity is leading into an abyss. Which is sort of similar to what their chief of uh staff said
when they said they're about to collapse, but um Yes, this is definitely the end of Israeli
superiority. The idea that they could just roll through um the Middle East and do what they want is
being fiercely uh resisted by the axis of resistance on all fronts. So, um it's um something that
they always point out when the battle was in Gaza, the other uh resistance factions saluted them. We
see the prisoner exchange and handover here. Um and the uh Yemeni fighters here at the end, I think
um they're trained hundreds of thousands of them to to fight this battle. Um

the Yemeni armed forces are significantly larger, and here they are uh walking on al-Aqsa. So, uh
solidarity video um from Saraya al-Quds to the resistance axis. And here we have the PFLP Abu Ali
Mustafa Brigades commenting on the new Israeli execution law. This poster that was put out yesterday
says, "We are stronger than death and higher than the gallows." As the fist breaks the gallows uh
smashing the gallows. Um And Abu Obaida also spoke this week. He said, "Blessed are the hands of the
heroes of the Islamic resistance in Lebanon, which are inflicting heavy losses on the Zionist enemy.
The latest during a qualitative operation yesterday, we call on Hezbollah to intensify their efforts
to capture soldiers in order to liberate Palestinian and Arab prisoners from the depths of the
occupations prisons, especially after the approval of the law to execute prisoners. We urge the
heroes of Hezbollah to complete the mission." is what Abu

Obaida said. So, that is the resistance report for day 909 of Israel's genocide in Gaza and day 34
of the Irani of the US-Israeli war against Iran.
