Title: Lebanon: Most View US + Israel as the Enemy, Not Iran
Channel: BreakThrough News
Upload date: 20260603
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hUFA19SndsI
Video ID: hUFA19SndsI
Transcript language requested/found: en
Note: This text comes from YouTube captions or auto-captions and may contain errors.
But now on to Lebanon, which is a very
much a part of this regional war.
Israel's escalation in Lebanon reached a
major turning point yesterday after Iran
reportedly threatened to suspend talks
with the US if Israel followed through
on threats to bomb the southern suburbs
of Beirut.
Trump appeared to take that very very
seriously, seriously enough to rein in
the Israelis at least for now, saying
that Beirut is basically off limits and
that de-escalation could follow. He said
if Hezbollah holds its fire Israel has
continued to bomb southern Lebanon
though, and Hezbollah has as it has a
right to continue to respond. Meanwhile,
the Lebanese government just met with
Israeli counterparts in Washington D.C.
at the State Department for these
you know, so-called direct negotiations
that are
not exactly representative of the US
government or of the Lebanese people.
They're trying to basically separate the
Lebanon front from the Iran-US talks and
keep Lebanon out of any broader regional
settlement. But a new poll, which is
what we're going to be talking about in
this segment, a new poll by Professor
Jad Melki, director of the Institute of
Media Research and Training at Lebanese
American University, suggests that this
does not reflect where most Lebanese
people actually stand, especially when
it comes to Israel, the US, Iran,
resistance and Palestine.
Jad joins us today to talk about the
significance of his findings. Jad,
welcome to Breakthrough News. It's so
good to have you.
>> Thanks, Rania. Thanks, Zoey.
>> And you are talking to us of course from
Beirut. And before we get to your poll,
I kind of want to ask you about your
thoughts on the latest news because like
I mentioned,
Trump has claimed that he negotiated a
new arrangement
between the Israelis and the Lebanese to
prevent Israeli attacks specifically on
Beirut, saying that if that works, maybe
eventually it will lead to de-escalation
across the country.
But it requires, you know, not just
Israel refraining from striking Beirut,
but also Hezbollah to hold its fire. The
details around that remain a bit murky,
including whether that applies to only
cross-border raids by Hezbollah
or against any attacks on Israeli troops
that are occupying Lebanese territory in
the south. So, I'm curious, what do you
make of this new arrangement?
And do you think it suggests that
Lebanon is in fact being negotiated as
part of this broader regional settlement
between the Iranians and the Americans?
>> So, the last thing I checked in the news
is that they started the meeting in DC.
The statements from Trump, I don't like
to comment on those because 5 minutes
later they change and flip and become
contradictory. So, the only thing I can
comment on are the stable comments.
That's the comments of the or the
statements of the resistance. And the
Iranian actually statements have been
steadfast. The resistance has rejected
the deal that in return for not striking
Beirut, the resistance will not strike
occupied north Palestine. They have
rejected it and I think some 12
statements today.
And I think the the Americans have
understood the the message. The Iranians
have been very steadfast behind that
position, too.
So, we have to wait and see what's going
to happen. But we know where we stand.
We have no idea where Trump stands right
now or in 5 minutes or tomorrow morning,
who knows?
>> Yeah, it's it's like again, it's Trump's
world and we're kind of just responding
to it, but you know, your research, Jad,
is is extremely important in this regard
because you're actually,
you know, polling and getting the
sentiments of the people within your
country. And your poll did find that 87%
of respondents agreed that Israel is
their enemy. 51% view the United States
as their enemy and 38% viewed Iran as
their enemy. At At same time, there were
more complicated divisions over tactics.
You found that
uh 54% agreed diplomacy is the only path
to liberation.
35% supported armed resistance as the
only path, and 51% agreed that Israel
should be destroyed, while
34% supported signing a peace agreement
with Israel.
So, that's a lot. Uh what stood out to
you most in these results, and what do
they tell us about Lebanese public
opinion at this moment?
>> Uh so, let's start with the first part
uh about the 87 or close to 90% uh
enmity towards Israel. Uh I'm actually
not surprised from that result. Uh
several years ago and several months
ago, we've had the the same results when
it comes to Israel. Uh what really
bothered me, and what was the incentive
to run this study, is that uh if you
watch the media, you'd think that uh
most of the country has become with
Israel, but it's really actually a bunch
of media uh outlets, mostly TV stations,
uh that have been funded by Western
resources, uh that keep spewing up
propaganda and
trying to change public opinion towards
that. But, that's that's not a very easy
thing to do with the Lebanon. But, what
actually struck me are the results
towards the US and Iran. I was actually
expecting the opposite. I was expecting
maybe 50 to 60 uh enmity towards Iran,
uh and maybe 30 to 40 enmity towards the
US, but those numbers were actually
flipped. And I had to check,
double-check, quadruple-check these
numbers. I was quite shocked. Um and I
even looked uh back at other studies to
see what's happening uh with the image
of the US, with the uh international
sentiment towards the US. This is this
is a very clear message to the United
States uh in the world today.
Uh sentiment towards the United States
has been plummeting uh since the Obama
era. It was actually somewhere positive
around 60 65%.
Uh, right now it's in the 30s, somewhere
in the between 30 and mid-30. And there
are two and only two reasons to blame
for that. The Trump administration and
policy, but more so the Israeli
genocidal regime.
The US right now is paying the price for
supporting this uh genocidal psychopath
uh regime and all its crimes and for
funding it and sending it weapons and
supporting it and covering its crimes.
This is what's happening and this should
be a very clear alert to the US. If the
US wants to keep or bring back its
positive standing, there needs to be a
lot of change. Change in policy,
especially foreign policy, and change of
support to this genocidal regime.
>> You know, your your poll also um broke
down some differences between uh class,
generations, and different religious
sects.
Um
but despite those differences, cuz there
was some some differences depending on
who you asked, one thing that remained
overwhelmingly strong across the board
in Lebanese society was this opposition
to Israel. So, I'm curious if you can
maybe talk a little bit about what stood
out most to you about those divisions
and what do they tell us about where
Lebanese public opinion is headed?
>> Sure, absolutely. Um let me let me
clarify one thing that what we did not
measure public opinion, we measured
something deeper which we call uh uh
political attitude.
>> Mhm.
>> Political attitude is not uh
uh quickly changing.
Uh uh uh it's strong, it's not very
easily affected by the media, it lasts
for much longer. You need uh campaigns
and propaganda over years to change
political attitude. While political
opinion is very superficial, can often
change very rapidly from from one day to
another. So, those these numbers uh will
last for a long time. And as you said
earlier, some of these numbers look as
if they're a bit contradictory, but you
can easily explain them. The enmity
towards the overwhelming enmity towards
Israel, and then
the other number that says that only 35%
support armed resistance, while some 50%
support
diplomacy. This is what Lebanese think
about dealing with Israel. So, there's a
a big chunk of Lebanese who believe the
only way to deal with Israel
is the same way they've been doing to
us, with military arms, with
uh with
armed resistance. While the others, and
I I I understand their sentiment because
they are afraid, they're worried, they
feel that this country is much stronger
than us, so we need to figure out a
different way to deal with them, and
they choose diplomacy. But
unfortunately, diplomacy has not worked
for many other countries, especially
Palestine in this part of the world,
specifically with this Israeli genocidal
Israeli regime. So, this is what
explains somewhat of the some of the
some of the differences. And you can
also see differences between religious
communities,
differences between economic
level, and differences between age.
What I'm actually glad to see is the
young generation
carries the highest level of enmity
towards Israel, the highest level of
support for armed resistance, the lowest
level of of support for a {quote} peace
agreement with with Israel. And that is
very refreshing,
and I can I can attribute that directly
to October 7, to the
operation
the operation that happened October 7
that triggered and brought attention to
what is happening in Palestine, to the
century-old
suffering in Palestine. I can see that
in even in my kids. At one point in
2020, 2021, we felt that Palestine is is
no longer a thing. Nobody's talking
about it. And then October 7th,
uh, uh, happened. Al-Aqsa flood
operation. And I was actually surprised
to find out that two of my daughters
actually were arrested in the US for
protesting for free Palestine. And I'm
a big part of me was worried, but a big
part of me was also proud and and happy
to see, oh, wow. Wow, this this issue is
back on the conscious of young people's
minds. So, so that is that is one of
some of the reflections of the the
divisions in the findings.
>> Yeah, that's super super important to
hear. And I also thought it was super
interesting that even across sect, of
course, things varied slightly, but
there was still that
majority, you know, uh, sees Israel as
the enemy. And that's despite, um, this
kind of elite discourse that we see in
Lebanese across Lebanese media. I mean,
much of Lebanon's political, financial,
and media establishment pushes, as you
know, this very strong anti-Iran,
pro-American narrative that often
portrays normalization with the Israelis
as this kind of like inevitable thing or
something that's desirable. And you
know, um, there's figures like Antoine
Zahraoui,
uh, who is a Lebanese banker,
uh, who's currently dating Morgan
Ortagus, who was appointed, a Trump
appointee to to, you know, be an envoy
for the region.
Um, and calls himself a Christian
Zionist. This guy has funded media
outlets and political projects across
Lebanon that are aligned with that
vision I just described towards
normalization and against resistance,
while really being celebrated in
Washington as someone who represents the
Lebanese people.
Um, yet, you know, your polls show this
overwhelming hostility to Israel again
across these different, uh, divides.
Um, and significant skepticism as you
described towards the US. So, I just I
wanted to know why do you think there's
such You kind of already explained it
this kind of the reason there's a
disconnect between the views of
Lebanon's elites and the views of
ordinary Lebanese, but I wanted to ask
you, you know, what role has the media
played in shaping um opinions in Lebanon
cuz opinions have changed slightly
um and it is quite dangerous, but then
again it's still failing. And I guess
maybe that's kind of self-evident, but
why is it failing?
>> So, let's let's actually highlight one
very important finding is that um
mainstream or traditional or legacy
media has fallen for the first time so
much behind to the point that that what
that was another shocking finding. I've
been doing uh opinion surveys and
political attitude surveys and media
usage surveys since 2013 in Lebanon.
Every couple of years we do something
like that. And every single time
television has topped the list of all
the media. Uh somewhere between 85 and
90% of the public say television is
their main source of information uh for
news. This war is the first time in
history that we saw that television
dropped down to the to the mid-30% while
social media, especially WhatsApp uh
groups. I know that's not very uh
popular in the US today, but in Lebanon
that is the main source of news today
for most Lebanese. just drastically uh
jumped up. So, there's a lot of change
in the media landscape and I even sense
that today with some uh
uh media owners uh and media producers
contacting me and asking me about the uh
the uh these polls. They were very
worried that I don't know, maybe they're
worried they're going to lose their
funding from Sahnaoui or they're going
to lose their jobs or businesses. So,
uh probably uh there's a a of dispersion
of information now. It's not
concentrated in a few hands like it used
to be before. And I also want to say
that in the US, I mean, I'm very
thankful for
uh for media outlets like you. I mean,
we call we call your operation
alternative media, but there's also a
lot of
others that I can think of at The
Intercept, Double Down, Mondoweiss.
Those have you have made the big
difference in public opinion since
October 7th. And this is This was
actually very clear even before we
started doing the surveys. One of the
reasons why we did the surveys. I even
wrote about
uh
these alternative media in my book that
that that came out recently, but I wrote
that 2 years ago that the the the public
consumption of media around the world
has drastically changed and people tend
to go and flock to media that reflect
their ideologies and their beliefs. So,
the influence of propaganda is very
limited today. Especially when you see
that the battleground the the bat
battles in the field are shifting the
opinion more than what the news anchor
is saying, more than what the politician
is going up and saying. You know, one
video with these FPV drones showing uh a
an Israeli tank being blown up or a
bunch of Israelis running away. That is
more powerful propaganda than a million
newscasts than all of these TV stations
in in in Lebanon. That
um gives higher morale to the fighters,
to the supporters of the resistance,
devastates the Israeli army and its
supporters and its politicians. In fact,
the Israeli generals and politicians are
panicking from these these FPV uh
drones. The Americans uh the Pentagon
just yesterday announced that they're
looking for different companies to
develop these
what they call killer uh drones. So,
everybody is now seeking those. This is
the real propaganda. This is what
synchronizes the military and the media
machine. The world has changed. Uh
whatever Sahnawi is paying for all these
millions of dollars. And by the way, I
know that he specifically has paid for
multiple radio stations in Lebanon. And
if you look at the percentage of people
who follow uh radio stations, it's dead.
It's dead. Newspapers have died in
Lebanon. Radio stations now are dead.
That's like 1 to 3% of people still
following radio uh for you. So, he can
go and spend all the money that he stole
from uh from our banks, from our savings
uh when the banks collapsed in Lebanon,
and waste it on the propaganda that's
going to be very useless.
>> Well, you know, interesting. We'll just
use the moment to promote the the
exciting news today, which is that
people People's Dispatch and
Breakthrough News are joining forces.
And you know, being an even more
formidable institution in this uh media
battle that you're you're alluding to.
But,
going back to your to your poll and some
of the findings, you know, in this in
this context uh in this past couple of
months especially we've seen this that
the US government appears that it is
attempting to try to recruit elements
or, you know, the Lebanese government
and parts of the Lebanese state into its
war on on Hezbollah. Uh sort of like a
Palestinian Authority model where local
institutions are pressured to police
resistance or even declare war on them
on behalf of Israel.
Based on your research and what you know
about Lebanese society, will this model
actually work in Lebanon? Or is this
proposal and model going to run into uh
resistance?
>> Well, it ran into resistance before in
1982 when the Israelis tried to impose a
president on Lebanon
uh and a government that will serve the
Israeli interests.
Uh look, this is a strategy that empire
has always tried to use.
Um you find a small elite in a country,
usually a
minority group that is sometimes hated
by the public. You support it.
That group sucks the money and the
resources of the country and gives the
empire the biggest chunk. That's not
going to happen. That's not going to
happen in Lebanon. We're not going to
have
house slaves. That's the I think that's
the
the word that will serve the Israeli
occupier or the
empire of the world, the colonial empire
of the world. It's not going to happen.
I know the Lebanese. I know my people.
We actually would rather keep fighting
until the end and we have been doing
that and we have been winning.
I think the Israelis and the Americans
need to learn from history. When the
Israelis occupied Beirut and came in
thinking that the Lebanese are going to
welcome them in open arms and they went
into cafes and restaurants and started
I don't know. They thought they were on
a tourist operation and very quickly,
very quickly, just regular Lebanese
citizens pulled out
crude weapons and started shooting at
them and just a few weeks later they
were crying on these speakers like
please don't shoot at us. We are
leaving. So, even you know, even with a
worst case scenario that is even a
fantasy of Netanyahu today. The current
resistance for some strange reason I I
don't think that could even happen right
now. They have been advancing with
military operations, with everything.
Even if they for some reason stop or
give up, there's going to be another
group that comes out. They did that
first with the Palestinians. They
claimed that the Palestinians are the
reasons why we're occupying Lebanon and
we're going to kick them out, blah blah
blah and then we saw what happened. And
now they're doing the same thing.
They're claiming, "Oh, it's the it's
Hezbollah. It's the resistance. It's the
Shia community." They keep on coming up
with different with different excuses.
But, look at the results. Really look at
the result and you'll find a big chunk
of the public from all religions, from
all classes, from all ages, from all
communities support the armed resistance
and believe that Israel is the enemy and
want it out.
>> Well, Riad, I really, really, really
appreciate your analysis and this poll
is so important. So, really appreciate
that you carried it out. It's much
needed in this moment as we await to see
what this next round of fake
negotiations between the Lebanese
government and the Israelis,
you know, comes out with. We hope to
have you back on again soon. Really
appreciate you and stay safe out there
cuz you are talking to us from Lebanon.
>> Thanks, Donya. Thanks, Joey.
