Title: Israel ‘stuck’ militarily in south Lebanon as killer drones shift the war, analyst says
Channel: Al Jazeera English
Upload date: 20260601
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BvM0A2nyEvE
Video ID: BvM0A2nyEvE
Transcript language requested/found: en
Note: This text comes from YouTube captions or auto-captions and may contain errors.
Okay, and now joining us from Beirut is
Jad Melki, professor of media studies at
the Lebanese American University. Thanks
very much for being with us, Jad. We
appreciate it. The past few days we have
seen this serious uptick in attacks in
territory that has been taken by the
Israeli military. How significant has
this escalation really been on the
ground?
>> Thanks for having me. Most of the
escalation has been targeting civilian
centers, the city of Tyre,
villages in South Lebanon, and
historical sites like the video
mentioned, the Beaufort Castle, or what
we like to call in our indigenous
language the Shaishif
fortress. And most of these have been
built by Netanyahu as major strategic
accomplishments, but that has been
mostly exaggerations. I mean, even the
Shaishif uh fortress, it's really,
unless we're living in the 12th century,
it's not a strategic military location
anymore.
The problem is Netanyahu is stuck.
He cannot advance very quickly. He will
break the Israeli army, and he cannot
sit still in the occupied territories of
South Lebanon right now because the
resistance is basically hunting his
soldiers like like sitting ducks.
So, he's stuck, and he can only bomb and
kill civilians and target hospitals and
emergency medical medical staff. So,
that is the situation in South Lebanon.
>> And that's what we were hearing from our
correspondent Zena Khodr, who was
telling us that Hezbollah can't stop the
advance of the Israeli army, but they
can make it very difficult for them. At
this time, Jad, diplomacy is going on
between the Israelis and the Lebanese
government, which is, of course, not a
party to this conflict. It isn't
fighting. So, I wonder what this
escalation could mean for those talks.
>> So,
>> the talks that have been happening in in
DC, even even from day one there was a
lot of doubt about their legitimacy,
about whether the public is behind them,
whether they will
produce any results. And even now the
prime minister and the president have
been somewhat backtracking and lowering
the expectations. Couple of days ago the
prime minister said that we might not
reach anything. We might whether will be
they might be no outcome out of these
negotiations. And just today uh, the
president has lowered the expectation
and said
it's going to take a long time.
But going back to the issue of the the
military the military aspect, yes, this
is a
this is a guerrilla warfare on from from
our side, from the Lebanese side. This
is an asymmetrical warfare. The
resistance has always been been clear
about this. They cannot stop a major
regular army that bills itself as the
fourth strongest army in the world. Who
has been fighting for 100 days to barely
occupy 5 km or 6 km into Lebanon. But
the introduction of the the FPV drones,
especially with the addition of the the
night vision today, has been driving the
the Israeli commanders crazy. They can't
do anything about it. They can't stop
it. This has been a major strategic
shift on the battleground to the point
that just today I read in the Washington
Post that the Pentagon is looking for
companies to develop these cheap what
they call killer killer drones. So this
has majorly shifted the battlefield. And
now it's it's reflecting on the
negotiations
with with the backtracking and the
lowering of the expectations of the
Lebanese government.
>> But the other problem with this kind of
warfare, Jad, isn't it that it sort of
blurs the lines of where is the front
line and thus puts civilians into the
conflict and and puts them at risk. And
we're seeing that all across Lebanon.
We've been seeing it since March. More
than a million people have already been
displaced. Now we have these new forced
evacuation threats all over the south,
all over the southern suburb, and there
isn't anywhere for these people to go.
Some of them for the second, third,
fourth time in this conflict. And is the
Lebanese government prepared? Can it
handle taking care of all of these
people after all of these towns and
villages get flattened?
>> Well, it's not really the situation that
is causing the civilian casualties and
the civilian pain. This is the Israeli
strategy that they started in Gaza and
then in the West Bank and now and in
Syria and now in
in Lebanon.
The resistance when they fight, they
attack military assets. They attack
soldiers. They attack commanders. They
are not attacking civilians. If a if the
the what is called what is so-called the
fourth strongest army in the world world
with all its precise weapons
cannot limit its attack to to military
assets, then it is their fault for
what's what's happening. We did not
impose this war on them. All they need
to do is withdraw from South Lebanon and
everything will stop. And actually this
is what the speaker of the house
Nabih Berri said today that he can
guarantee this
the ceasefire from our side, but the
Israelis need to stop and need to
withdraw from all of South Lebanon. Yes,
there is pain on the civilian side.
There's a lot of destruction. And again,
this is the strategy of the Israeli
Israeli occupation. They try to hit
civilian centers in order to create
pressure civilian pressure on the
Lebanese government in the hopes that
they will turn the governments and the
Lebanese army against the resistance,
but that's not going to happen. We have
wise thankfully we have wise politicians
here. We still remember the civil war.
We still remember what happens when
Lebanon is divided and so far we've been
we've been doing fine. Now as for the
uh, uh, the displaced, Uh, there's a lot
of facilities. there's a lot of
political parties, there's a lot of
NGOs, a lot of civil society groups that
are helping. Yes, it's extremely
painful. Uh, we're very empathetic.
We're trying to do everything we can.
The government actually does not have a
lot of resources on that, but there's a
lot of other organizations that are
helping. I also I don't I don't want to
exaggerate or underplay the pain of the
displaced, but a lot of them now have
figured out a way of finding other
places to stay at with family, with uh,
renting uh, those who can, uh, other uh,
houses in non-targeted areas. But also
there are major uh, refugee centers, uh,
displaced centers that are also
welcoming and and helping them.
>> Jad Melki, professor of media studies at
the Lebanese American University, thank
you for joining us from Beirut.
