=== PDF_PAGE 23 ===
Introduction
The Lebanese Republic is one of the most unusual states in the
world. It is a conglomeration of paradoxes and contradictions. Since
it became independent of France in 1943 it has struggled from one
crisis to another, avoiding disaster by the narrowest of margins.
Lebanon as a polity is archaic, inefficient, and divided; it is also
liberal, democratic, and—in general—orderly. It is Arab and West-
ern, Christian and Muslim, traditional and modern. Its precarious
survival is a fascinating subject for the student of politics.
This study attempts to answer two questions about Lebanon. How
did it succeed in enduring through the dangerous years after inde-
pendence, and what are its prospects for the future? The answers
require an analysis of the relationships between the changing capa-
bilities of its political system and the changing burdens imposed
by the environment. Lebanon’s present uncertain viability is largely
the result of its limited capacity to modernize politically during its
first two decades as an independent country. Its future development
depends on whether or not its modernizing capacity will continue
to bear the increasing weight of external and domestic pressures.
Some readers familiar with Lebanon may be astonished at the idea
that the little state is modernizing in a political sense. Economic
and social modernization is obvious, but political modernization is
not. Indeed, many Lebanese citizens, who equate modernization
with improvement or progress, are more inclined to view their
political life as regressive or, at best, stagnant. There is considerable
truth in such views; indeed, compared with states that rank near it
on levels of socioeconomic development, Lebanon is politically un-
derdeveloped.1 Its executive stability is low, it lacks a modern party
>

=== PDF_PAGE 24 ===
4 *INTRODUCTION
system, and its administrative capabilities are deficient. These weak-
nesses are rendered all the more serious by an apparent increase in
the adversity of the Lebanese social and economic environment.
They do not augur a bright future for the country. But, if the system
is so defective, its apparent success over two decades is puzzling.
It is this puzzle that makes Lebanon an interesting political subject.
The Lebanese experience illustrates both the surprising possi-
bilities for modernization in a deeply divided political culture and
the strains that such a process imposes on the political system. Be-
neath the surface of corruption, stagnation, and meaningless change
there are indications of growing rationality, complexity, flexibility,
participation, and executive power in the Lebanese system. The im-
portant issue, however, is not simply the occurrence of these trends
but rather their velocity and amplitude. It will be suggested later that
these trends are taking place in independent Lebanon but also that
they are moving rather slowly. They have been of sufficient scope
to permit the insubstantial stability that has made postwar Lebanon
prosperous, but they have not left much margin of safety. By the
same token, however, their gradualness has forestalled the destruc-
tion of the fragile balancing mechanisms that adjust frictions among
Lebanon’s several primordial communities. The object of this study,
therefore, is not only to identify the political changes that are occur-
ring but also to assess their rates of change and to compare them
with the changing environmental loads.
Lebanon, the land of Phoenicia, is today a constitutional par-
liamentary republic of around 2 million people. The country is
divided into five provinces—Beirut, Mount Lebanon, North
Lebanon, South Lebanon, and the Biga (see Map 2)—and sub-
divided into administrative districts. For all its cultural divisions,
Lebanon is formally a unitary state, and the provincial governors are
entirely responsible to the central government. Local government is
largely controlled from Beirut, although municipalities elect officials
and have unofficial mayors (mukhtars). Although Lebanon’s legal
system is patterned after the French Code, such matters of personal
status as marriage and inheritance fall under the jurisdiction of the
several religious courts. Justice by feud and vendetta competes with
justice by the Criminal Code.
A parliament is elected by the people every four years, and a
President of the Republic is elected every six years by the Parlia-
ment. Seats in Parliament are allocated on a sectarian as well as a
geographical basis, and by custom the President is a Christian

=== PDF_PAGE 25 ===
Introduction + 5
and the Prime Minister a Muslim. The President may not seek re-
election. The constitution, written in 1926 by Christian notables in
consultation with the French Mandate authorities, gives the Presi-
dent considerable power. The President names the Prime Minister,
who in turn selects a cabinet; but, although the Cabinet is theo-
tetically answerable to Parliament, it is in fact answerable to the
President. Between 1943 and 1964 Lebanon had three Presidents,
seven Parliaments, and thirty-six governments. During the same
period it experienced three serious attempted coups d’état and, in
1958, a short civil war in which the United States intervened mili-
tarily. The prevailing economic and political philosophy in Lebanon
favors unrestricted private enterprise, and the government, like the
country in general, derives most of its income from trade.
Lebanon is divided, historically, along sectarian, regional, and
family lines. Not only is there chronic suspicion between Christians
and non-Christians; there is also incessant rivalry among the various
sects within each of the two religions. Local communalism antedates
the establishment of the present territorial entity in 1920 by the
French, and even today there is tangible cultural distance between
the people of the three outlying provinces (North Lebanon, the Biga,
and South Lebanon), which were grafted onto traditional Christian
Mount Lebanon by the French Mandatory, and those of the core
area of Beirut-Mount Lebanon. No sect, region, or family coalition
commands a majority of the population; in fact, it cannot be sci-
entifically or legally ascertained whether Christians or non-Christians
predominate in the contemporary Lebanese state, although there is
an important myth that Christians exceed Muslims and Druzes in a
ratio of six to five. It is difficult to name a political culture more
divided along traditional lines. Traditional divisions are to some
extent deepened by conflicting foreign pressures: The regional and
international ferment of the postwar era is reflected in local politics,
complicating further the basic cleavages. Furthermore, since World
War II, Lebanon has experienced an extremely rapid rate of social
mobilization, which has superimposed potential new political divi-
sions on this fragmented political culture. Although some aspects of
social mobilization, notably mass communications, have spread
rather widely, such others as population concentration, urbanization,
and economic growth have been confined almost entirely to the
Greater Beirut area. And, whereas the service sector of the Lebanese
economy has blossomed beyond all earlier dreams, the mass-employ-
ment sectors—agriculture and industry—have remained relative

=== PDF_PAGE 26 ===
6 * INTRODUCTION
backwaters. Vulnerable as it is to so many of the burdens that be-
set all contemporary new states, Lebanon’s experience invites com-
parison not only with neighboring Arab states but also with all frag-
mented polities undergoing rapid, uneven social change—from
Malaysia to Italy, from Nigeria to New York City.
The political system in Lebanon embodies a confusion of ele-
ments that render it extremely difficult to classify according to the
usual typologies. Lebanon is a democracy, but it is also an oligarchy.
One could reasonably place it in four of the five types of new
states proposed by Edward Shils.” It is stable enough to attract
enormous amounts of capital, yet a radio speech or a thrown rock
can send the country into turmoil. Reform movements are as routine
as corruption. Cabinet crises are chronic. The party system is feeble,
yet public opinion is politically volatile. In short, many generaliza-
tions about the new states do not apply easily to Lebanon, and those
that do contradict one another.
It is understandable, therefore, that the student of Lebanese
politics should look away from single-nation models in search of a
theory that will explain the Lebanese situation. The field of inter-
national politics, strangely enough, offers a model that seems to ex-
plain the Lebanese political situation much better: the classical
balance-of-power system. In Lebanon, as in the international system,
there is no ultimate arbiter of conflict and no monopoly of the
instruments of force. This observation may seem strange drawn from
a state that possesses full legal sovereignty, international recognition,
and a modern army, gendarmerie, and police force. The fact remains,
however, that central government control is a tenuous thing, de-
pendent on the agreement of powerful local leaders who themselves
command sizable deterrent forces and who can take advantage of
certain geographical, cultural, and historical conditions to assert
their autonomy if their interests are threatened. Furthermore, in
Lebanon, as in the international system, there are several actors,
none of whom is strong enough to control the entire system.
The balancing process is observable at four levels: sectarian,
regional, personal, and institutional. In a society divided almost
equally between Christian and Muslim inhabitants and subdivided
along sectarian lines within each religion, Lebanon’s domestic tran-
quillity is based upon a perpetual stand-off among the sects. If,
in the normal course of politics, one sect demands and receives
additional representation in the Cabinet, other sects will demandi t
too, resulting in either an enlarged Cabinet or a withdrawal of the

=== PDF_PAGE 27 ===
Introduction + 7
original sect’s advantage. On a larger scale, if for some reason
Parliament were to elect the Muslim Grand Mufti of Lebanon
President of the Republic, it is probable that the various Christian
sects, which normally are not united, would unite to thwart such a
move, and it is possible that they might carry a portion of the
Muslim Shiite community with them. One would see a classic
balance-of-power maneuver. Similar maneuvers can be observed on
a regional scale. If the President of the Republic is a Maronite from
North Lebanon, it is less easy for a Sunnite in Tripoli to be Prime
Minister than it would be if the President were from Mount
Lebanon. If major public-works projects are authorized for Beirut
without some compensation for the politicians of South Lebanon
and the Biqa, the Prime Minister may find his majority threatened
with mutiny from the deputies of those regions. At the level of
notables and personalities, the balancing process is clearest. Leba-
non’s intricate clique politics are reminiscent of eighteenth-century
England, characterized as they are by alliance building on the part
of semiautonomous personages. One alliance will call into being a
counteralliance, as there are enough families with varying degrees of
power and ambition in any region to coalesce against the dominant
group. The electoral process, at both the municipal and the par-
liamentary levels, simply legitimizes and institutionalizes this struggle.
A prominent example of the balance-of-power struggle among no-
_ tables occurs in the Druze community between the leaders of two
traditional factions; it has not only involved the enlistment of
other notables on each side but has also used British-French rivalry,
Arab-Lebanese tension, and even the conflict between capitalism and
socialism. Fortunately, in terms of general order, there are a great
many arenas in which gains and losses can be registered, and the
scoring process is not very precise.
It is at the institutional level, however, that the most spectacular
balance-of-power plays of recent years have occurred. The President
of the Republic has been striving constantly to enhance his power
at the expense of other institutions. On two occasions, in 1952 and
1958, such assertions have triggered countermoves by an alliance
of parliamentarians and notables with the army.
It will be noted that the main actors in the balance-of-power
system may be classified as parochial rather than as modern and that
even those, like President and Parliament, that carry nonparochial
titles are operating essentially from communal power bases. Nor will
it escape the attentive eye why the successful Lebanese politician 1s

=== PDF_PAGE 28 ===
8 * INTRODUCTION
pragmatic and unfettered by ideology or program. The logic of the
balance-of-power situation requires him to be flexible above all, to
make and break alliances with a minimum of embarrassment, and
to promote his self-interest, which is tied with traditional bonds to
the interest of his local constituency.
THE STABILITY PROBLEM
Americans and Europeans concerned with the development of
moderate liberal democracy in the new states often argue that the
main obstacle is lack of political stability. This instability may be
the result of an entrenched traditional culture that lacks the re-
silience, education, and personality characteristics for such institu-
tions. It may also be caused by the breakdown of this culture
through the forces of “modernization,” which creates anomie, in-
flated expectations, and general disorder. Or it may be explained
by the general low economic level. The Lebanese experience ap-
pears to support the general point: First came stability, then democ-
racy. Appearances can be deceiving, however. In Lebanon, there is
reason to think that the relationship is precisely the reverse: Demo-
cratic institutions have been a requisite for political stability, not
a result of it. This stability has in turn permitted the conservation
of traditional pluralism while allowing a degree of modernization
and economic development.
If democracy produces stability, what produces democracy? Stu-
dents from Alexis de Tocqueville to David Truman have accepted
the idea that a proliferation of overlapping private organizations is
essential for a moderate democracy.* But twentieth-century Lebanon
is not analogous to nineteenth-century America. In the first place,
the pluralism of Lebanon is basically primordial, that is, traditional,
as opposed to the rationalized pluralism of the United States. Co-
hesive family, clan, and sectarian groups are mobilized to participate
politically as autonomous security communities in defense of their
own identities; only when these identities are secure can the politics
of nontraditional interest groups proceed normally. The nearest
American equivalent is found in the pre-Civil War period and is
reflected appropriately in Calhoun’s theory of the concurrent major-
ity. In the second place, pluralism is not the only pillar upon which
the American democracy rests; a second vital condition is public
security. With some notable exceptions, American political behavior

=== PDF_PAGE 29 ===
Introduction + 9
is predicated upon an assumption that a public interest exists and
can be served without severe threat to vital private interests; the
American state has won legitimacy by serving this public interest.
Lebanon does not enjoy this second condition: Its subcommunities
are mutually suspicious, and they do not trust the formal institutions
to be powerful or impartial enough to protect their local interests.
Formal institutions thus do not engender the kind of positive
legitimacy inherent in the Western notion of rule of law. In short,
the subnational communities are compelled by the situation to act
as if they were states in an international environment. And, para-
doxically, because a deeper positive consensus is lacking, institu-
tional procedures must serve as the balancers essential to the con-
dition of stability. In the United States pluralism plus legitimacy
(the basis of public security) make democratic practices possible;
in Lebanon pluralism plus democratic practices (the mechanism
for the balance of power) make public security possible.
THE DEVELOPMENT PROBLEM
If stability were the only issue in politics, the balance-of-power
process observable in Lebanon might be judged a complete solu-
tion for all states not blessed with positive consensus. Of course,
there are other basic issues that affect the stability problem. The
question of national development is one of them. National develop-
ment is a problem for a new political system, in that it requires
innovation and rational coordination. In the post-World War II era
it is a problem that no state can evade. It is a problem that the
process of social mobilization aggravates and ameliorates simul-
taneously. Because new states lack the infrastructures and human
skills requisite for undirected economic “take-off,” the problem falls
on the sector that generates the demand in the first place: the
political system. During its first decade of independence, the Leba-
nese Republic was spared the full rigors of demands for develop-
ment, largely because its talented commercial elite successfully
influenced the government to institute liberal tariff and monetary
policies. These measures, known collectively as the policy of the
“free economy,” are as politically significant as is the most radical
socialist planning. Furthermore, the balance of power operated
adequately enough during that first crucial decade to provide the
domestic order necessary for a commercial economy. In subsequent

=== PDF_PAGE 30 ===
10 * INTRODUCTION
years, however, the demands for direct political intervention in be-
half of national development have greatly increased; and with these
demands has emerged the latent contradiction between the balance-
of-power process essential for basic stability and the need for
greater central power to provide the newly demanded capabilities.
What does “national development” entail in a state like Lebanon?
Insofar as it is confined to the development of water, electricity,
and transportation facilities, it does not tax the balance-of-power
process unduly. But, when it begins to involve administering a
social-security system or decentralizing medical services, it strains
the capabilities of the system. Sensitive foreign-policy issues, like
those that arose during the Suez War of 1956 and the Arab-Israeli
War of 1967, can nearly dislocate the balance, because important
minority groups differ sharply over what the national interest really
is. All these stresses converge upon the Presidency. As the main
repository of authoritative power, the Presidency has become the
locus of political modernization, and the conflict between the
President and traditional power holders has become increasingly
severe. But, just as nuclear technology exerted restraining effects on
behavior in the international system, there are factors that check
disintegration of the analogous system within the Lebanese Republic.
All the sectors in this little system, to the extent that they share an
interest in maintaining it, are restrained by the same forces that
tend to drive them apart. The demand for socioeconomic growth
coupled with a vocal radical socialist movement elsewhere in the
Arab world hangs like a sword of Damocles over notables and gov-
ernment alike. Lebanese politicians, who have learned to com-
promise in order to preserve pluralistic autonomy and stability, are
well aware of the advantages of similar accommodation of the new
regional forces. Although lacking central control and legitimacy,
the Lebanese system thus does in a limited way coordinate itself for
national development. Whether or not this rudimentary capability
will be sufficient in the long run depends upon a leveling off of the
environmental loads.
THE PROBLEM OF SOCIAL JUSTICE
One of the hallmarks of the postwar ferment in the Arab world,
one at least as important as national development, has been the in-
creasingly powerful pressure on political systems for fairer represen-

=== PDF_PAGE 31 ===
Introduction + 11
tation and more equitable distribution of wealth and status. Insofar
as demands for social justice are directly related to the stability
problem, the Lebanese system makes sophisticated adjustments in
a complex but efficient manner. Justice in confessional terms is
thus meted out according to a strict formula: Political and adminis-
trative representation by sect is numerically balanced. The distribu-
tion of real power is adjusted incessantly through a complex inter-
play of traditional pressures. Although sectarianism functions pri-
marily to preserve stability, its beneficial effects for social justice
are not negligible. A similar argument can be made for the repre-
sentation of regions and great families, as well as for pro-Western
and pan-Arab interests. The essence of ordinary Lebanese politics
is the continuous incremental adjustment of these interests.
A second aspect of social justice is political liberty. Lebanon is
rightly known for its tolerance of diverse opinions. Almost every
political element can be heard in Lebanon and can operate with
_Telative freedom. This salutary situation is doubtless possible as
much because of the weakness of central authorities as because of
a genuine spirit of tolerance, but whatever its causes it is functional
in terms of demands for social justice. Repression is directed only
to opinion and activities judged injurious to all the elements in the
Lebanese mosaic, and it is frequently ineffective. In the eyes of
radical Arab politicians Lebanon may be archaic, but it is hardly
despotic. And its liberal characteristics give it considerable moral
and political weight.
Beyond this basic liberalism, however, the capacity for institu-
tional adjustment declines; and, as social justice becomes more a
matter of income redistribution, class and status equality, and
transnational philosophies, it presents a more pressing problem.
Liberalism, like the concurrent-majority arrangement, harmonizes
with the historical necessities of the balance of power; but redis-
tributive justice, like planned development, does not. Here, indeed,
the Lebanese system is weakest. This weakness is becoming in-
creasingly critical because of the rapid political mobilization of both
masses and new elites. The latter tend to favor radical reform to an
extent that challenges the balance of power. Lebanese notables, no
matter how liberal they may be, are loath to undermine their own
positions by approving land reforms, progressive taxation, and curbs
on the “free economy.” Opponents of the new social justice in
Lebanon point to the experience of the progressive Arab states,
arguing that those states redistribute poverty, not wealth. The com-

=== PDF_PAGE 32 ===
12 * INTRODUCTION
parison, however, has another edge, which many Lebanese notables
have also perceived: Elites that have not adjusted to the demands
for redistributive justice have perished. The Lebanese establishment,
therefore, is confronted with a potential dilemma: To adjust to the
new social justice and the newly politicized elements may lead to a
derangement of the traditional balance of power, with its attendant
instability; not to adjust may invite the total destruction of the
political system.
POLITICAL MODERNIZATION
“Like the states of seventeenth-century Europe,” Samuel P. Hunting-
ton has written, “the non-Western countries of today can have politi-
cal modernization or they can have democratic pluralism, but they
cannot normally have both.”* Lebanon has shown signs of ab-
normality. The balance-of-power situation has forced upon it a
little of each. In the absence of legitimized central control, a kind
of democratic pluralism has been a necessity rather than a luxury.
Similarly, under the increasing pressures of modernization, the bal-
ance has been altered to accommodate the moderate development
of rationalized authority, differentiated political structures, and
mass participation. These accommodations must be analyzed, as we
have suggested, in a setting of interrelated environmental stresses:
Failure to handle the problems of national development and social
justice will have adverse repercussions on stability, and by the same
token too much success in those areas may be equally disastrous.
The critical questions are yet to be answered. How much alteration
will such a delicately balanced system sustain without collapsing?
How strong are the disintegrative tensions inherent in such a frag-
mented political culture, shaken as it is by conflicting external and
social-mobilization demands? Analysis of these questions is the
purpose of this study.

=== PDF_PAGE 33 ===
Introduction * 13
NOTES
1 Michael C. Hudson, “A Case of Political Underdevelopment,” Journal
of Politics, Vol. 29, No. 4 (November 1967).
2 Edward Shils, Political Development in the New States (1959), mimeo.
According to this typology, Lebanon could be described as a political de-
mocracy, a “tutelary” democracy, a modernizing oligarchy, or a traditional
oligarchy. It could not be described as a totalitarian oligarchy. Cf. Leonard
Binder’s typology in Iran: Political Development in a Changing Society
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1962), pp. 44-5. Lebanon falls
more often into his “traditional” category than into the “conventional” or
“rational” category, but it does not fit easily anywhere.
3 Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, 1 (New York: Vintage,
1958), 433-6, chaps. 16, 17; David Truman, The Governmental Process
(New York: Knopf, 1951), chap. 3, pp. 519-24.
4Samuel P. Huntington, “Political Modernization: America vs. Europe,”
World Politics, 18, No. 3 (1966), 412.
