=== PDF_PAGE 37 ===
CHAPTER ° 1
Obstacles to National Integration
Dans un pays comme le nétre, fait de minorités
sensiblement égales et également jalouses de
leurs droits, ou aucun élément ne peut-étre pré-
tendre de constituer une majorité oppressive, ot
il ne saurait étre question de régime de con-
trainte—la seule paix réalisable est une paix
consentie, fondée sur l’entente et la collabora-
tion, sur un état d’équilibre.*
The above statement by Charles Helou, written after the fall of
the Vichy administration in Lebanon and General Catroux’s promise
of independence, puts Lebanon’s historic problem—and its solution
—succinctly. For two decades politicians like Charles Helou, act-
ing within an institutional framework specifically predicated on the
idea of equilibrium and the principle of the concurrent majority,
have successfully implemented this solution and kept the state from
disintegrating. Their success is all the more remarkable when the
magnitude of the historic disintegrative forces is properly appre-
ciated.
The fragmentation of modern Lebanon’s political culture has two
dimensions. One is sociocultural and reflects the multiple, diverse,
and often contradictory identifications of its peoples. The second
derives from the area’s vulnerability to and attraction for foreign
political interests. The two are interrelated through the dynamics
of internal insecurity and external rivalries. Minority groups with
historical memories of old enmities understandably look to outside
powers or coreligionists for guarantees, and every traditional group
is in some sense a minority group. Regional or international powers
17

=== PDF_PAGE 38 ===
18 * STRESSES
at the same time find it possible to cultivate client communities; and
modern Lebanon has been strategically desirable enough to prove
attractive. Both sociocultural parochialism and external interven-
tion tend to be functionally disintegrative for the political system, in-
sofar as they perpetuate loyalties that conflict with identification with
the modern Lebanese entity.
PAROCHIAL TENDENCIES
Political culture, writes Sidney Verba, “consists of the system of
empirical beliefs, expressive symbols, and values which defines the
situation in which political action takes place. It provides the sub-
jective orientation to politics.”* To speak of political culture in
Lebanon solely in terms of a body of shared beliefs would ignore
its diversity and parochialism, crucial characteristics that function
both as blessing and curse for the political system. There are several
beliefs shared by most Lebanese, but we shall argue that they are
mainly derived from shared suspicions and communal orientations
and possess only a thin basis independent of these historical mem-
ories.* Coordinating a set of highly articulated subcultures is, in-
deed, one of the two fundamental problems confronting the Leba-
nese political system. It is a problem that most states, old or new,
face in some degree but few in such formidable proportions. Re-
ligious, communal, and kinship cleavages have made Lebanon
politically an area of traditional veto groups. Since the Egyptian
occupation (1831-1840), these vertical cleavages have been en-
larged and exploited both because of external political interests and
by related socioeconomic modernization, and the horizontal strati-
fication has taken on increasing political importance.* All the more
impressive, therefore, is the signal accomplishment of the modern
Lebanese political system: institutionalizing traditional pluralism.
To appreciate why this achievement is so notable it is necessary
to discuss two broad aspects of the traditional pluralism prevailing
in Lebanon. One, which we shall dwell upon only briefly, is the
extraordinarily pervasive influence of families and family alliances in
politics; the other is the religious and sectarian fragmentation of
the country. Together they constitute a particularly intricate pattern
of what Professor Carleton Coon calls the “mosaic culture” of the
Near East, and they constitute a crucial intervening variable in the
political life of Lebanon.* So strong are these factors that Lebanon’s

=== PDF_PAGE 39 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 19
political institutions, traditional and modern, have been molded to
reflect them. It would be a mistake to underestimate the success of
an institutional equilibrium that has averted many a crisis and pro-
duced at least a superficial stability. The fact remains, however, that
the several “primordial sentiments” dividing the Lebanese polity
greatly retard its political modernization by promoting immobilisme
_ and hindering the development of rationalized authority structures.®
They foster political loyalties that ignore the Republic in favor of
either local or supranational interests. Indeed, Lebanon’s institutional
solution only perpetuates and strengthens these divisions.
Political Cliques
The characteristic political pattern in Lebanon, as throughout geo-
graphical Syria, is the labyrinthine, shifting factionalism of local
notables with their clienteles of supporters. This pattern is part of
the traditional culture and social structure of the Near East, in that
it merges the political domain with prevailing kinship and semifeudal
relations. It also has survived the numerous impositions of imperial
power from outside. The extended family is the basic political, as
well as social, unit in Lebanon. This structure—patrilineal, patri-
local, patriarchal, and endogamous—comprises the power base of
nearly all the important politicians in modern Lebanon, just as it
did for the notables during the Tanukh, the Maan, and the Chehab
dynasties of the Mamluk and Ottoman periods.’ Governed as it
is by an elaborate hierarchical code of obligations and interwoven
into the larger social units of clan, village, and tribe, the family is
the primary bulwark of the notable’s local autonomy. When nota-
bles of different families come together in a clique, they pool their
traditional power, and, insofar as they command strong loyalties
from their respective families, they become formidable obstacles to
the centralizer, rationalizer, or unifier.2 A French scholar has written
of Lebanon: “Les communautés libanaises sont donc en fait non
seulement de véritables communautés religieuses mais aussi de
véritables nations et des fédérations de familles patriarchales.” °
The existence of such families, however, only begins to explain
the complexities of traditional pluralism in the Lebanon. It is also
necessary to consider the lingering influence of Near Eastern feudal-
ism in its varying forms. This feudalism, as Iliya Harik has argued,
is significant as a political as well as an economic system; it es-
tablished formal power relations between notables at every level,
from the ruling amir, through the baronial muqataajis, the lesser

=== PDF_PAGE 40 ===
20 * STRESSES
shaykhs, and finally the local peasantry.” The mechanism establish-
ing this relationship was the igtd taxation system. Under the Sel-
_ juks, in the late eleventh century, the revenue of villages was divided
into two categories for taxation purposes. One part, the khas or
miri, went directly to the ruler, but the other, the igta, was collected
by local officials, partially for their own use and partially for dis-
bursement on projects of the central administration. The igfa‘, in
effect, was a kind of monetary fief. In the Lebanese mountains
especially, the igfa‘ was more prevalent than were the more direct
forms of taxation, and local autonomy was higher than in other
parts of the Empire.’ The igta° system thus reinforced and perpetu-
ated the local autonomy of the great families from the lesser families
and the peasants, while the concomitant absence of effective general
power drove the lesser elements to establish allegiance with the
local chiefs in return for protection. At the same time the existence
of many quite autonomous power centers, a condition reinforced by
the mountainous terrain, necessitated the emergence of factional
politics and elaborate bargaining processes. For two and a half cen-
turies under the Chehabs, the double ga’imaqamiyyah, the mutasar-
rifiyyah, the French Mandate, and now the independent Republic,
family alliances rooted in these socioeconomic patterns have played
the dominant political role in the region.” The decline of feudalism
in the latter part of the reign of the Chehab prince, Amir Bashir I,
culminating in the European-guaranteed reforms of 1861, initiated a
new phase of the society of the Lebanon; yet even today in Mount
Lebanon the shell of the old feudal structure shapes the distribution
of power, and old feudal families like the Chehab, Arslan, Jumblat,
Talhouk, Khazen, and Karam play an essential role.** And in the
districts added to Mount Lebanon in 1920 the vestiges of feudalism,
economic as well as political, are still evident, although even there
new forces are stirring.'* So deeply ingrained are these particularis-
tic loyalty patterns, so pervasive is the influence of the great families,
so intertwined are political and social affiliations that a century of
Westernization—both material and intellectual—has not worn them
away. The feud is as much a part of Lebanese life in the 1960s as
it was a century earlier. It ranges from the everyday vendetta in-
volving family honor to full-fledged clan wars that disrupt national
political life. The Maronite families around the town of Zagharta in
North Lebanon, for example, periodically engage in battles that re-
quire the intervention of a full army brigade. Electoral activity and
rational political participation in general are frequently disrupted by

=== PDF_PAGE 41 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 21
family feuds. Even if there were no religious cleavages in present-
day Lebanon, there would still be a politics of clique and balance,
and there would still be formidable traditional barriers to building
a positive identity with the national state.
Religious-Sectarian Cleavages
_ Albert Hourani has written, “The primary divisions inside the Near
East are, as they have been for over a thousand years, religious:
whether a man is Moslem, Christian, or Jew, and which branch of
the Moslem, Christian, or Jewish community he belongs to.” * No-
where is the truth of this statement more apparent than in the
Lebanon, and the independent Republic finds this particular manifes-
tation of traditional pluralism an increasingly critical problem.
The sects are politically important because they are traditionally
the primary social organizations through which political security
has been maintained. In Lebanon the sects have long been organized
in semiautonomous communities, and the religious chiefs have had
distinct political functions. This form of organization has been par-
ticularly strong in the Maronite community, whose clergy were im-
portant in undermining the igfd° system during and after the Chehab
dynasty.*® These closely knit communities, institutionalized as mil-
lets under the Ottoman domination, maintain their own personal-
status laws and effective internal systems for conflict resolution even
in modern Lebanon. In times of trouble one is compelled to identify
himself as a Christian or a non-Christian; in ordinary times it is
often necessary for an individual to assert or exploit his member-
ship in a particular sect, like the Sunnite (Muslim) or the Maronite
(Christian). It is difficult for any outside observer to speak at length
about the intensity of sectarian feelings, but it is safe to say that
they involve a more complete commitment than do the kinds of re-
ligious affiliation common to the West; hence their relevance to
politics. Not, however, that the Lebanese in general are highly re-
ligious; rather, sectarian affiliations are communal and sect affilia-
tion has a corporate aspect. The two strongest sects, the Maronites
and the Sunnites, share a wide range of cultural and ethnic charac-
teristics and outlooks. Indeed, their corporate spirit spills over into
the political realm. Strong Maronites regard Mount Lebanon as their
territory, and their creed includes a claim to dominion over it;
similarly, many Sunnites feel an affinity with the Arab-Muslim world
around them and identify with Arab nationalist and unity move-
ments. Mutual insecurity results in incessant competition for power

=== PDF_PAGE 42 ===
22 * STRESSES
the scarcest and dearest value; political tension is the final prod-
uct.
Because sects are represented in Parliament and administration
according to their presumed porportions of the population and
because the census that determined these proportions was taken in
1932, there is an understandable reluctance on the part of the
elite, with its interest in the status quo, to examine the confessional
proportions again. Therefore the real confessional breakdown of the
population today is a politically sensitive issue about which little
solid information is available.1*? Table 1 presents an official estimate
TABLE 1
LEBANESE POPULATION BY SECT, 1956
Sect Estimated Population
Maronite 424,000
Sunnite 286,000
Shiite 250,000
Greek Orthodox 149,000
Greek Catholic 91,000
Druze 88,000
Armenian Orthodox 64,000
Armenian Catholic 15,000
Protestant 14,000
Jewish 7,000
Syrian Catholic 6,000
Syrian Orthodox 5,000
Latins (Roman Catholic) 4,000
Nestorean Chaldeans 1,000
Others 7,000
Total 1,411,000
Sir Reader Bullard (ed.), The Middle East: A Political and Economic Survey
(3d ed.; London: published by Oxford University Press for the Royal Institute of
International Affairs, 1958), p- 453.
made in 1956 and may be taken as a rough indicator of the present
situation.
The accuracy of these proportions in the middle 1960s is impos-
sible to ascertain; the Lebanese government refuses to divulge its
own recent estimates. It is probable, however, that the rate of in-
crease of non-Christians (Sunnite and Shiite Muslims and Druzes)
is higher than that of Christians, for reasons that will be discussed
in Chapter 3, and that therefore the proportions are changing. In.
most states such a demographic shift might have scant political

=== PDF_PAGE 43 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 23
relevance, but in Lebanon it challenges the myth that supports the
entire intricate governmental structure. According to the myth, this
structure is legitimate because it allocates political positions by sect
according to each sect’s share of total population. The 1932 census
found that Christians exceeded non-Christians in a ratio of six to
five, and political positions were allocated accordingly. For example,
seats in the Lebanese Parliament are distributed precisely on this
basis. In the ninety-nine-member Parliaments of 1960 and 1964 the
Maronites were allotted twenty seats, the Greek Orthodox eleven,
the Greek Catholics six, the Armenian Orthodox four, the Armenian
Catholics, Protestants, and Christian minorities one apiece for a
Christian total of fifty-four. The forty-five non-Christian seats were
distributed as follows: Sunnites twenty, Shiites nineteen, and Druzes
six. These proportions have been maintained in all the Parliaments
of the independent Republic. The formula, furthermore, provides
that the President of the Republic be a Maronite, the Prime Minis-
ter a Sunnite, the Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies a Shiite, and
the Deputy Speaker and Deputy Prime Minister Greek Orthodox.
Cabinet portfolios are carefully distributed among Christians and
non-Christians, and key ministries are reserved for particular sects;
the Foreign Minister is always a Christian and usually a Maronite;
the Interior Minister is usually Sunnite; the Defense Minister is
usually Druze. Furthermore, every sect has a fixed share of im-
portant administrative posts.
Ingenious as this arrangement is, it has obvious drawbacks. Real
power is not easily parceled out according to numerical formula,
and the non-Christian sects have long complained that the Chris-
tians, and especially the Maronites, are disproportionately powerful.
This complaint was an important cause of the 1958 civil war, and
one of the results of that crisis was the equalizing of administrative
and Cabinet post allocations between the two religions. As long as
the real population proportions are debatable, the legitimacy con-
ferred by the myth is frail indeed.
One might ask why such elaborate arrangements are necessary.
Part of the answer is apparent to any American who lives in a large
city like New York or observes the national political conventions:
A religiously and ethnically balanced ticket makes political sense.
But political sectarianism in Lebanon runs somewhat deeper than in
the United States, and ethnic security is a higher-priority issue.
Every sect has memories of historical periods of subservience, and
in the relatively short span since the Chehab dynasty there has been

=== PDF_PAGE 44 ===
24 * STRESSES
oF \\ ya
iy Praha!
outright conflict. In Mount Lebanon Shiites and Maronites clashed
in the eighteenth century and Druzes and Maronites in the nine-
teenth century. In the twentieth century since World War I, the
normal social relations between Sunnite Muslims and Christians,
especially the Maronites, have been inflamed and remain tense to-
day. The rise of indigenous “national” feelings in the last two cen-
turies, closely interwoven with sectarian loyalties and exacerbated
by outside intervention—political, military, economic, and cultural
—has contributed to the contemporary fragmentation of the politi-
cal culture in Lebanon.
To appreciate the sectarian problem it is necessary to observe
the distribution of the major sects and their doctrinal differences.*®
Table 2 presents an estimate of the distribution of the major sects
in the districts of Lebanon (see also Map 1). Although each sect
is thickly concentrated in certain areas, there is not a single dis-
trict without visible, if not substantial, minority representation. This
distribution begins to make clear why the major sects can retain
some political autonomy and how the ecological situation imposes a
substantial mutual tolerance: Every sect in effect holds hostages of
other sects and is simultaneously vulnerable to reprisals. There is no
love lost, for example, between the Sunnites of Tripoli and the
Maronites of neighboring Zagharta, but intemperate behavior is de-
terred by the existence of small minorities of each sect in each place.
Similarly, the Greek Orthodox, the Sunnites, the Shiites, and the
Druzes, of the Merjayoun district, share a common incentive to live
together peacefully, as do the Shiites and Maronites in Kisrwan; the

=== PDF_PAGE 45 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 25
FIGURE 1. President of All. Left
to Right: Protestant, Armenian
Orthodox, Shiite, Druze, Greek
Orthodox, Sunnite, Maronite.
\ ae BS oe isa
Weal null Ibu
Sunnites and Shiites in Baalbek; the Maronites, Shiites, and Druzes
in Baabda; and all the sects found in Beirut. Communal separatism
is strong, but living together is a practical possibility as long as the
sectarian balance of power remains stable at the national level. The
reason that communal identities remain so strong, reinforced rather
than obliterated by the communications explosion, is the result of
historic doctrinal differences and memories of oppression, both an-
tique and recent.
The Maronites, the largest single sect, composing some 29 per
cent of the total population, appeared in northern Syria during the
sixth century and were driven into the Lebanese mountains in the
early part of the seventh century by the Islamic tribes from
Arabia.'® The patron saint of the Maronite Church is an ascetic
monk, Maroun, who seems to have lived early in the fifth century,
but its founder was Yuhanna Maroun (c. A.D. 707), under whom
the sect developed a distinct communal and political organization.
Although the Maronites have been speaking Arabic since the fif-
teenth century, they retain Syriac derivations of the original Aramaic
in their liturgy. From their beginnings the Maronites fell into bloody
conflict with such rival sects as the Jacobites and later, in the
seventh century and after, faced more formidable foes, “. . . hold-
ing with one arm the Moslem caliph and with the other the
Byzantine emperor.” *° It is said, although many Maronites now
deny it, that the sect professed the Monothelite heresy (the doctrine
that Christ has two Natures but one Will) between the seventh
and twelfth centuries. With the invasion of the Crusaders, however,

=== PDF_PAGE 46 ===
26 * STRESSES
Each symbol represents 10,000 people.
Maronite
Greek Catholic
Greek Orthodox
Protestant
Armenian Orthodox
Armenian Catholic
Sunnite Muslim
Shiite Muslim
Druze
OBnO JeOwishO PHOP
Dotted line represents the
boundary of old Mount Lebanon.
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
Map 1
Ottoman Mount Lebanon and Recent Distribution
of Major Lebanese Sects
After Pierre Rondot, Les Institutions Politiques du Liban (Paris: Imprimerie
Nationale, 1947), p. 32. Reprinted by permission of Institut des Etudes Islamiques
de l'Université de Paris and General Pierre Rondot.

=== PDF_PAGE 47 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 27
TABLE 2
DISTRIBUTION OF RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES IN LEBANON, 1950
PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION OF DISTRICT*
Greek Greek Armenian
District Maronite Orthodox Catholic Orthodox Sunnite Shiite Druze
Akkar 18 2 1 0 52 0 0
Tripoli S 10 0 1 78 0 0
Zagharta 90 3 0 0 6 0 0
Batroun 76 18 2 0 1 3 0
Koura 28 63 0 0 8 4 0
Hermel 3 0 30 10) 6 62 0
Baalbek 12 2 4 0 112 68 0
Zahleh 19 10 23 8 24 10 1
Kisrwan 85 ys 1 D. 1 8 0
Metn 51 9 5} 19 0 0 30
Baabda 48 8 3 1 3 18 18
Aley 29 16 3 0 1 2 46
Chouf 34 0 9 0 22: 2 Sil
Saida 8 0) 8 0 18 62 0
Jezzine 63 0 16 0 3 5-20 1-5
Rachaya 4 25 2, 0 28 0 37
Merjayoun 6 14 0 13 45 13
Tyre 6 0 6 2 4 80 0
Beirut 8 11 3 24 24 6 1-5
* Percentages by caza (district) are the same as those calculated after the evalua-
tion of population on December 31, 1944. That is the most recent date for which
there are figures on confessional distribution for cazas as well as muhafazas
(provinces). Religious data for the entire populations of the cazas were not
available; therefore the columns for districts do not total 100 per cent. Several
of the minor sects have been omitted.
Etienne de Vaumas, “La Répartition Confessionelle au Liban et l’Equilibre de
PEtat Libanais,” Revue de Géographie Alpine, 43 (1955), 511-603.
the Maronites entered into communion with the Roman Church.
The relationship was strengthened in the late sixteenth century and
again in the year 1964, when the Patriarch of the Maronites was
made a cardinal. By the fourteenth century, Maronites were located
in numerous villages from Qadisha in the North to the Nahr (River)
Ibrahim in Mount Lebanon, and foreign travelers were impressed
with their organizational capacities.?' Despite harsh Mamluk domi-
nation, the Maronites prospered and spread southward and into the
Biga, where they mixed, none too peacefully, with the Shiites, also
seeking refuge in the mountains; traces of Maronite-Shiite friction

=== PDF_PAGE 48 ===
28 > STRESSES
in the Biqa remain to the present day, despite the presence of a
common potential Sunnite threat.” Farther south the Maronites
established relatively friendly relations with the politically dominant
Druzes. But during the eighteenth century, as the Maronite com-
munity continued to increase rapidly in numbers and wealth, it
began to challenge Druze power, and by the middle of the nine-
teenth century it had largely succeeded in displacing that power.
This community’s political success, achieved by a militant clergy,
which had engendered a strong ethnic, protonational feeling, was an
underlying cause of the great massacres of 1860. These massacres
climaxed several years of violence in which the Druze nobility
resisted with force the changes being pressed by Maronite peasantry
and priesthood. They left 11,000 Christians killed, 4,000 dead from
destitution, and 100,000 homeless.?*? This dreadful memory helps
to explain the unusual cohesion and suspicious outlook of the com-
munity today. The massacres precipitated not only the end of
feudalism among the Maronites, converting them into a community
primarily of small farmers, but also the open intervention of the
European powers, which placed Mount Lebanon under the juris-
diction of a Christian governor. This foreign guarantee for the
Maronites and, to a lesser extent, for the other Christian sects was
strengthened with the imposition of the French Mandate in 1920.
With the end of direct foreign protection in World War II, the
Maronites, as chief beneficiaries under the old arrangements, were
understandably uneasy about independence.
The Greek Orthodox, comprising something over 10 per cent of
the population, are the second largest Christian community and
trace their origins to the historic split between Byzantine and
Roman Christianity in 1054. The Eastern Church developed na-
tional churches like the Russian, Serbian, and Greek, each with
its own patriarch and autonomous religious jurisdiction. In the
nineteenth century the Greek Orthodox Church in the Near East
took Arabic for its liturgical language and Arabs for its priests.
Many of the Orthodox consider themselves distinctly Eastern, op-
posed to the Roman Church and the infallibility of the Pope, and
some consider themselves purer Arabs than the Sunnite Muslims
are, recalling their origins as Arab tribes and inheritors of the
original Eastern Empire.** Since the end of the Byzantine Empire,
Moscow has assumed the spiritual and political importance for
many of the Orthodox faithful that France has for the Maronites. _
The Russian Revolution, however, has weakened, though not. ob-

=== PDF_PAGE 49 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 29
literated, that historic tie. In modern Lebanon the Greek Orthodox
is perhaps the most urbanized and best-educated community. It in-
cludes much of the financial elite, yet it also supplies some of the
most radical and destabilizing elements. Of all the Christian com-
munities the Greek Orthodox has been the most favorable toward
pan-Arab nationalism and the least happy with a political system
_ dominated by a sect in communion with Rome. By the same token
it has performed important mediating functions in the crises of the
independent Republic.
Lebanon’s Greek Catholics are a splinter group of the Orthodox.
They were persuaded in 1709 that the Church should return to
Rome, but they failed to convince the majority and have since held
a rather defensive position in relation to that majority. Their Pa-
triarch alternates his residence between Cairo and Damascus. In
modern Lebanon the Greek Catholics are bunched in the middle
districts, or cazas, of Mount Lebanon Province and in the medium-
sized towns.” Both the Greek Catholics and the Greek Orthodox
have achieved exceptionally high rates of literacy and social mobil-
ity. Their upper classes are mainly large merchants, financiers, and
bankers. These communities are numerically too small to obtain
any of the primary positions under Lebanon’s system of political
sectarianism; nevertheless, they have come to exercise great power
behind the scenes. One well-informed observer has remarked, “In-
deed, the making and unmaking of Lebanese statesmen was, cer-
tainly before 1958, almost a prerogative of the Greek Orthodox and
Greek Catholic upper class.” ”°
The most recent group to find refuge in Lebanon, with the excep-
tion of the Palestinian Arabs, is the Armenian community. The
fourth largest Christian sect (the greater part of it is Orthodox),
it is also the least assimilated of all the religious-ethnic groups in
Lebanon and is the only community that does not use Arabic in
normal conversation. The Armenians were driven through Asia
Minor and into Syria during the Turkish massacres in 1895, 1909,
and 1922, and in 1929 the Ataturk regime evicted more. In 1938,
when the French ceded Syria’s Alexandretta province (Hatay) to
Turkey, more Armenians fled south toward Lebanon. Many Ar-
menians still regard themselves as foreigners in Lebanon, and many
indigenous residents of Lebanon regard them the same way.” The
language problem and the fresh memory of oppression perpetuate
Armenian cohesiveness, but the Armenians’ Christianity gives them
an extremely important bond with Lebanon’s Christian communi-

=== PDF_PAGE 50 ===
30 * STRESSES
ties, and they have been welcomed by such political groups as the
Kataeb, which have a strong interest in maintaining the myth that
Lebanon is predominantly Christian. Since 1943 a few seats in
Parliament have been reserved for Armenians, and in 1960 one of
their deputies was named to a special cabinet position. In the mid-
dle 1960s Armenians are demanding regular participation in the
cabinet.
Lebanon’s three major non-Christian communities are the Sun-
nite or orthodox Muslims, the Shiite or heterodox Muslims, and the
Druzes, an offshoot of the Shiites.22 The Sunnites constitute the
second largest community in the Lebanese Republic, with perhaps
20 per cent of the population. There are reasons, discussed in Chap-
ter 2, for thinking that this estimate is low. In any case, the per-
centage does not include the considerable number of Sunnite resi-
dent aliens who are Palestinian refugees or Syrian laborers. Since
Mamluk times, the Sunnites have been dominant in the coastal
plain and in the towns of Tyre, Saida, Beirut, and Tripoli. There
are also concentrations in the hinterlands of Akkar, the Biga, and
South Lebanon. The mountains, however, have historically been
closed to the Sunnites, remaining havens for the Maronites, Druzes,
and Shiites. The decision of the French authorities in 1920 to
create a state of Greater Lebanon by annexing these largely Sun-
nite areas to historic Mount Lebanon was galling to the many
Sunnites who had enjoyed relatively privileged positions under Ot-
toman dominion and to those Sunnite Arab nationalists who saw
the Arab Revolt betrayed by its Western sponsors. As for the
Maronite Christians, as long as their French protectors governed
Lebanon, they were content to see their traditional domain ex-
tended to ensure an economically viable state.
Lebanon’s Sunnites are composed of a small class of large land-
owners, a professional and commercial bourgeoisie, and a large
stratum of peasants and workers. Like orthodox Muslims every-
where, they believe in the supremacy of one God and in His teach-
ings, which were set down by Muhammad, his last and greatest
Prophet, and elaborated in the Traditions and Laws of Islam. To
the Sunnite the Caliphate, the now defunct legitimizing office of
the Islamic community, and the Sultanate, the highest political
authority, were always theoretically congruent; to him the polarity
between church and state, which so profoundly marks Western
political development, was inconceivable. When the Ottoman Em-
pire began to decay rapidly during the reign of Abdel-Hamid II,

=== PDF_PAGE 51 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 31
the Sultan tried deliberately to resuscitate his authority by empha-
sizing his role as Caliph. Sunnites were thus under spiritual obliga-
tion to the political authorities and enjoyed concomitant status as
true believers. Nonbelievers were persecuted, and deviant believers
—other “people of the Book”—were tolerated but not as equals.
Herein lies much of the contemporary friction between Lebanese
Christians and Muslims, for after 1920 the status ranks were in
effect reversed. Liberation from Ottoman rule placed the Sunnites
of the coast under the dominance of the French and their favored
clientele, the Maronites. It also destroyed the legitimizing religious
tie that had customarily sealed their obedience to authority. At the
same time, it separated them from their coreligionists in Syria and
beyond. The politics of the independent Republic has revolved to
a great extent around the problem of integrating the Sunnites into
the political system. Although this problem has been controlled, it
has not been solved: Just as the other minorities cherish their
autonomous pasts, so many Sunnites feel traditional attachment to
a political-religious entity beyond the borders of the little state.
The Shiites and the Druzes together probably outnumber the
Sunnites, another circumstance that tempers the Christian-Muslim
confrontation in Lebanon. Both groups are heterodox offshoots of
orthodox Islam; both have known persecution at the hands of the
Sunnites, for example, under the Mamluks at the turn of the four-
teenth century. The Shiites parted with orthodox Islam during the
seventh century at the time of the struggle between Muawiya
(founder of the Ummayad Caliphate at Damascus) and Ali for the
succession to Muhammad’s divinely ordained position of leadership.
Ali was the Prophet’s son-in-law, and his supporters were the
Shiites. When Ali lost and when his son Hussein was killed at the
Battle of Kerbela (681), the dissidents left the fold completely.
Since then a number of Shiite communities with varying dogmas
have appeared in the Muslim world. Lebanon’s Shiites believe that
the true succession to Muhammad passed through Ali to a line of |
eleven other imams, or spirit heads, the last of whom disappeared
in the ninth century but who is expected to reappear at some time
in the future.2® These Shiites, known as the Metawali, have been
described by one French scholar as less puritanical and more emo-
tional in their religious behavior than are the Sunnites, commem-
orating, for example, the death of Hussein every year with pilgrim-
ages and parades noted for their fervor.*® In contemporary Leb-
anon the Shiites appear to be the poorest of all the sects, the least

=== PDF_PAGE 52 ===
32 * STRESSES
socially mobile, and the least exposed to modernity. They are
primarily serfs or indentured farmers in southern Lebanon, a poor
agricultural area, and in the northern Biqa. Theirs is possibly the
most feudal of the sects, and their leadership—the heads of the
major families and clans like the Hamadehs and the Assaads—
has been venerated, it is said, with almost religious devotion. As a
sect, their lot has been hard since what one scholar calls their
“golden age” in the tenth and eleventh centuries—the time at which
the Shiite Fatimid Caliphate in Cairo protected the heterodox in
Syria.** With the decline of the Fatimids, the coming of the Cru-
saders, and the rise of the orthodox Mamluks and later the Otto-
mans, the Shiites were largely driven out of Mount Lebanon and
reduced to the condition of backwardness from which they have
only recently begun to emerge. One of the most interesting political
developments in the postwar period has been, as we shall see, the
gradual modernization of Shiite leadership, a trend accompanied, of
course, by demands for a greater share of power.
Of all the politically relevant sects, the Druze is the most para-
doxical. Offspring of the Ismailiyyah, one of the Shiite heterodoxies,
the Druzes are described by Philip Hitti as “. . . a religious com-
munity that has survived for nine centuries like a fossil.” *° It is an
accurate description in many ways, for it is true that the Druzes are
extremely closely knit socially, yet at the same time Druzes in
modern Lebanon operate an airline serving Bombay, London, and
Accra, as well as the entire Middle East; they produce numbers
of engineers and doctors; and they support Lebanon’s only indig-
enous socialist party. Whether or not the Druzes are also losing their
communal identity—their religion prohibits proselytizing—is a de-
bated point, but the evidence of such identity displayed during the
1958 crisis and in their daily life suggests that it is still very strong.
The Druzes believe that the Fatimid Caliph Hakim, who ruled in
Egypt between 996 and 1021, was the tenth and most perfect rein-
carnation of God. This remarkable leader, however, died mysteriously,
and his worshipers, mostly Persian in origin, were forced to flee
into Syria and the Lebanon. In 1031, the Druze community was
closed to outsiders, and its belief and ritual remain somewhat
obscure even into the present time. Within the community a dis-
tinction is made between the religious elite, the ‘wggal, who are
privy to the inner secrets of the religion, and the ordinary believers,
the juhhal, who are ignorant of these mysteries. The past on-
slaughts of more powerful communities are reflected in the article

=== PDF_PAGE 53 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 33
of Druze belief known as tagiyya, which permits the Druze to
profess an alien faith if survival requires it. Several of the Druze
areas are still semifeudal in socioeconomic structure, a characteris-
tic also found among the Sunnites and Shiites but to a much lesser
extent among the Christians.
Politically, the Druzes reached their peak during the Maan
_ dynasty, which governed in the Chouf area of Mount Lebanon
from 1516 until 1697, when the line expired and the Chehab
family (then Sunnite) replaced it. Under the great Fakhr al-Din
II (1586-1635), the Druzes controlled the area from the Antioch
plain to Safad, just below the southern boundary of modern
Lebanon, and east to the Syrian desert until the new Ottoman au-
thorities finally put an end to his career. Fakhr al-Din was a
tolerant ruler and reopened the Lebanon to European influence:
French and Florentine merchants established commercial enter-
prises, and some Christian missionaries were admitted. But in-
breeding, isolation, and the line of lesser Maanids who followed
Fakhr al-Din weakened the political power of the Druzes, while
the Maronites gained in strength. During the Chehab dynasty
(1697-1842), the scales tipped in favor of the Maronites.** The
Druzes, however, have remained a potent force in the tangled poli-
tics of the area, and today the leaders of their rival internal factions
play conspicuous roles in nearly every cabinet and assembly, fre-
quently acting as balancer among the larger groups and exercising
effective vetos in crises.
The parochialism manifest in Lebanon’s family, community, and
sectarian structures poses severe environmental adversities for politi-
cal modernization, yet so far the Republic has narrowly but con-
sistently avoided disaster. That parochialism has not degenerated
more often into anarchy or stagnation is essentially the result of
political institutions and practices that mesh the various traditional
veto groups with one another. This meshing was present in the
traditional political system under the Chehab amirs and in the
mutasarrifiyyah system imposed by foreign interests in the later
nineteenth century. It is also present under the Republic, largely
because laissez-faire political liberalism is surprisingly congruent
with Lebanon’s traditional pluralism. In terms of individual and
corporate autonomy—values cherished in modern systems that have
largely lost them—Lebanese parochialism has desirable conse-
quences. Points of access are numerous, and methods of political
recourse that are meaningful to the individual are available. But, in

=== PDF_PAGE 54 ===
34 * STRESSES
terms of political modernization, which requires centralization,
greater governmental intervention, and rationalized procedures, this
parochialism poses serious problems. It limits the capacity of the
political instrumentalities to induce significant change. As long as
there are few elements seeking radical change, the problem is
manageable, and the stability produced by Lebanon’s neotraditional
system has thus far thrown a veil of affluence over the sores of dis-
content. Whether or not Lebanon’s uneven prosperity can alone
control the demands for change arising from social mobilization is
an open question.
Parochialism also limits the strength of general loyalty toward the
country itself. Autonomy may provide a degree of communal secu-
tity, but by weakening the possibility of authoritative central rule it
simultaneously promotes new insecurity. Because the confidence
that these communities have in the state is frail, the temptation and
need to seek support beyond Lebanon’s borders, to the West or to
the Arab world, are all the more intense. The legitimacy problem
is sustained by this vicious circle, and the cure—local autonomy—
only strengthens the malady. As a political culture, Lebanon is
a collection of traditional communities bound by the mutual un-
derstanding that other communities cannot be trusted. Such a state
of affairs may seem grim, but it is assuredly several steps above a
Hobbesian state of nature, in which a man is quite certain that all
others are his enemies. In Lebanon, at least, the communities can
be confident that the other groups, however untrustworthy they may
be, have a common stake in the status quo; and the sophisticated
Lebanese assume rightly that all important elements know that
their counterparts are aware, as they are, that any one can pull
down the entire structure. Mutual deterrence and actors with devas-
tating but relatively equal power create an uneasy perpetual truce.
Although this situation is better than anarchy, it is still not as good
as a consensus founded on positive trust.
EXTERNAL INFLUENCES
From the beginning of recorded history, the Lebanon has been the
object of conflicting foreign interests. The Republic that today oc-
cupies this crossroads is heir not only to the particularisms of tradi-
tional culture but also to the cosmopolitanism resulting from these
intrusions. Lebanon as a political entity is, in this rich context, a

=== PDF_PAGE 55 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 35
recent creation: By the most liberal reckoning it dates from the
establishment of the Chehab dynasty in 1697 and by a more con-
servative measure from the Réglement Organique of 1861. The
modern state itself, with its critical sectarian composition, goes
back only to 1920.** The idea of national identity is thin indeed in
comparison with the accretion of past loyalties, loyalties confined
_ to specific cliques and communities, often conflicting with one an-
other and incessantly manipulated by outside powers and ideologies.
External interventions, whether diplomatic, military, or ideological,
have contributed greatly to the fragmentation of political culture
in the modern Republic. Historians have fully described these pen-
etrations, and it is necessary here only to mention the most recent
ones under two broad categories of origin, Western and Arab.
Lebanon as a Western Preserve
When Amir Bashir II became ruler in 1788, the Lebanon was a
subsidiary of the Pashalik of Acre, a unit of the Ottoman Empire,
and the Amir was preoccupied for some thirty years in combating
interference from its governor, Jazzar Pasha. At the same time, the
great European powers were taking a new interest in the eastern
Mediterranean. Since the discovery of the Cape route to India in
the late fifteenth century, the area had been an economic and
strategic backwater. In the post-Congress of Vienna world, how-
ever, stimulated by Napoleon’s adventure in Egypt and the possi-
bility of a canal at Suez, both British and French interests in the
area were reactivated. France had traditionally been the dominant
trader with the Levant, and it maintained a religious obligation
toward Near Eastern Catholics dating from the Crusades and, ac-
cording to some, even before.** The connection was maintained by
Catholic missionaries and traders. Louis XIV declared himself
protector of the Maronites after that sect had undergone severe
mistreatment first at the hands of Mamluk and then of Ottoman
sultans. As the Ottoman Empire began to disintegrate in North
Africa and the Balkans during the nineteenth century, France’s
special relationship with the Maronites assumed political, as well as
commercial and religious, significance.
Great Britain too began to take an active part in Levant politics
as Ottoman authority declined, particularly in view of the new
strategic significance of the area. Alarmed by Napoleon’s invasion
of Egypt, the English set out to counteract French influence in
the eastern Mediterranean. In the Lebanon this intervention meant

=== PDF_PAGE 56 ===
36 * STRESSES
supporting the rivals of the Francophile Maronite clergy and no-
bility.** During the reign of Bashir II the British, through their
diplomatic agents, began to cultivate the Druze community, after
they had failed to win over the Amir himself. The latter, toward
the end of his reign, found himself allied with the Maronite lords
and the Egyptian conqueror Ibrahim Pasha, both of whom enjoyed
French support. Ibrahim, son of Muhammad Ali, the anachronistic
modernizer who had broken the reins of Ottoman control, had
moved Egyptian troops and administrators into part of Palestine
and Syria in order to extend his father’s domain and had actually
occupied those areas from 1831 to 1840.*" Great Britain opposed
this extension of Egyptian hegemony both because it was supported
by France and because it weakened the Ottoman buffer. British
agents had little difficulty in winning over the Druze shaykhs, who
had been harshly treated by Amir Bashir.**
Austria and Russia were also competing in the Levant, the
former hoping to displace France as protector of the Maronites
and the latter seeking to advance its political influence through the
Russian Orthodox Church. Russia, indeed, after its emergence as a
major force in European politics during the Napoleonic period,
presented a serious threat, particularly to the British interest. The
Crimean War of 1854-1856, neither the first nor the last of Rus-
sia’s thrusts toward the Mediterranean, was precipitated by its
maneuver to protect Orthodox Christians in the Holy Land from
alleged Ottoman oppression.
The Ottoman government, meanwhile, pursued a devious course
with respect to the Lebanon. Under the Tanzimat, the reform and
centralization programs (c. 1826-1827), the Porte tried to reassert
its authority over the semiautonomous amirate by convincing the
European powers that local rule was impossible. By inciting the
Druzes against the Maronite-supported Chehab rulers and refusing
to curb sectarian strife, Constantinople helped to bring down the
Chehab dynasty in 1842 and to replace it with an ineffectual dual
administration known as the “double ga’imagamiyyah.” The northern
district of Mount Lebanon was to be governed by a Maronite, the
southern by a Druze. Because the distribution of sects did not corre-
spond exactly to the division, however, troubles were only magni-
fied. By 1860, owing partly to this feeble arrangement and partly
to growing class unrest among the Maronite peasantry, the Lebanon
erupted into the civil strife mentioned earlier, during which the
Druzes slaughtered thousands of Maronites. The Turkish forces

=== PDF_PAGE 57 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 37
either refused to help the Christians or, in some cases, actually
led them to destruction.
Anarchy in the Lebanon was intolerable to the European powers
that had done so much to foment it. The Turks moved in to restore
order, the French landed troops to relieve the Christian populace,
and in June 1861 the six interested powers (Turkey, France,
England, Austria, Russia, and Prussia) signed the Réglement
Organique, abolishing feudalism and establishing Lebanon as an
autonomous province of the Ottoman Empire. Its governor, or
mutasarrif, was required to be a non-Lebanese Christian appointed
by the Porte but approved by the Powers, and he was to be sup-
ported by an administrative council with seats allocated to the
major sects. The new province was confined only to the Mountain
proper (Mount Lebanon), excluding the Sunnite-dominated coastal
strip, Beirut, the Biqa, and the northern plain. Under the mutasar-
riftyyah, which lasted until World War I, it enjoyed peace, educa-
tional development, and prosperity. The divisions that foreign
governments had stirred up in the struggle for diplomatic superiority
were muffled but not eradicated; World War I and its aftermath
rekindled them, particularly those between the British and the
French. This particular rivalry ironically contributed to Lebanon’s
ultimate independence, even as it exploited internal parochialism.
External political complications were multiplied when France’s
High Commissioner and Commander in Chief in Syria, General
Gouraud, established the State of Greater Lebanon on August
30, 1920, by attaching a large Muslim area to Christian Mount
Lebanon. The offspring of European diplomatic rivalries and
sectarian drives, the new state was born schizophrenic; its Catholics
were relieved to find French protection, and its Sunnites were
embittered by the betrayal of Arab nationalism. The politicians
of the modern Republic have been hard pressed to reconcile the
political tensions arising out of its origins in the Sykes-Picot and
San Remo agreements, and even after two decades of independence
from France the question of Lebanon’s political identity remains
troublesome. The cleavage between Lebanese who identify with
the Arab world and those who identify with the West varies with
the divergence of Western and Arab political interests. No under-
standing of modern Lebanon’s political weakness is complete
without an appreciation of the seeds of discontent sown in the
postwar partition of an Arab world just then embarking on a
quest for unity. It would be equally misleading, however, to

=== PDF_PAGE 58 ===
38 * STRESSES
ignore the forces opposed to the Arabization or Islamization of the
Lebanon. Not only were the Catholic Christians of the Mountain
simultaneously afraid and contemptuous of the “desert Arabs,”
but there were also groups of Lebanese notables in Cairo and
Paris with highly articulated programs for an independent national
Lebanese entity to replace the defunct Ottoman rule.” In ad-
dition to the traditional parochialisms of family, region, sect,
and religion that have complicated the governing of Lebanon, a
distinctly political issue had thus arisen by the end of World War I
over the kind of political “face” that the area ought to have.
The complex and fascinating story of how France established
its Mandate, putting a quick end to the efforts of the Sherifian
authorities in Damascus to occupy the Lebanon, cannot be told
here; but it must be noted that the Christians, and especially the
Maronites, welcomed the French administrators in the expectation
that they would provide security, Western cultural development,
and eventually independence.*® Whatever history’s verdict about
the success of the French occupation may be, these Christian expec-
tations were largely fulfilled, in one way or another, by the end
of 1943. The High Commission, in its role as Rousseauian leg-
islator, imposed a parliamentary system modeled roughly after
the Basic Laws of the Third Republic; it established a centralized
administrative apparatus; it encouraged the development of French
Catholic private education; and it undertook a program of road
building and water-resource development. With the cooperation
of certain Christian notables of Beirut and the Mountain, including
such future leaders as Michel Chiha, Emile Edde, Bechara al-
Khoury, and Charles Debbass, the High Commission, despite its
uneven leadership, managed to integrate into the new system the
traditional power structure of a large part of the area.‘ Greater
Lebanon was ruled directly by governors appointed by the High
Commissioner until 1926. At first, the Governor was provided
with an Advisory Council of seventeen representatives of the
major sects appointed by the High Commissioner. In 1922 this
council was replaced by a Representative Council elected through
universal male suffrage. The Representative Council became the
Constituent Assembly, which in 1926 wrote the Constitution that,
with the important modifications of November 1943, remains
in effect today. The Constitution is primarily the work of the
Greek Catholic banker and publicist, Michel Chiha, a man whose
writings provide the most acute and sophisticated exposition of

=== PDF_PAGE 59 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 39
Lebanon’s political raison d’étre.*? It established a parliamentary
republic with two chambers (the Senate was abolished in October
1927), collective and individual responsibility of the ministers,
universal and direct suffrage, and the distribution of parliamentary
seats along sectarian lines. The Constitution also provided that
the Parliament should elect a President, who in turn would
_ choose the head of government and the other ministers.** Actually,
under the Mandate the Constitution was largely a facade, and
Lebanon had two parallel governments: on one hand, the Parlia-
ment, President, Prime Minister, and Cabinet stipulated in the
Constitution and, on the other, the institutions controlled by the
High Commission. The latter consisted of the Services Spéciaux,
including the security forces, Bedouin control, and administrative
apparatus; the Intéréts Communs, with Syria, including customs
administration and concessionary companies; and the Troupes
Spéciales du Levant.** The Mandatory thus held the real power.
In November 1943, however, when the French grip was substantially
loosened, the newly independent President began to take over the
instruments of power once held by the High Commissioner; and this
concentration of power has been perhaps the most important, if
the least intended, legacy of the Mandate.
Lebanon in the Arab World
The Maronite clergy, led by the astute Patriarch Elias Butros
Hawayek, and the Christian Lebanese patriots of the Alliance
Libanaise and other groups were gratified by the creation of
Greater Lebanon under French supervision; but the Orthodox
Muslims and Arab nationalists inside and outside the territory
were profoundly disturbed. Their bitterness was a compound of
burgeoning aspirations for Arab unity and independence and of
a sense of betrayal at the hands of France and Great Britain,
the architects of partition and renewed foreign domination. In
their eyes, insult was added to injury when France decided to
create a state of Greater Lebanon.
Arab and Muslim antagonism toward the idea of a separate
Lebanese state cannot be explained without dwelling briefly on
the rise of Arab nationalism in Syria. The political ferment of the
modern Arab world has been traced back to the Napoleonic in-
vasion of Egypt in 1798 and the opening of that country to
Western influence.*® The Egyptians, however, failed in their effort
to dominate all the Arabs, and it was the cultural awakening in

=== PDF_PAGE 60 ===
40 * STRESSES
coastal Syria—particularly in the Lebanon—during the latter half
of the nineteenth century that spurred a distinctly modern and
increasingly secular Arab political consciousness.*® The implantation
of foreign educational institutions is the factor chiefly respon-
sible for this awakening, and as early as 1834 American Protestant
and French Catholic missionaries and teachers had initiated a
revival of the study of Arab history. A succession of missionary
educators like the Presbyterians Eli Smith and Cornelius Van
Dyke, the French Lazarist fathers, the Jesuits, and the Russian
Orthodox built presses and primary schools. Muslim notables too
joined in the revival, establishing the Maqasid Society, which
founded schools emphasizing Islamic culture. The Jesuit and
American universities, which have so profoundly affected the
development of the area, were founded in the 1860s. George
Antonius, in his definitive study, has described the political off-
shoots of this renaissance: the emergence of such outstanding
figures as Nasif Yazeji, Butrus Bustani, Jamal al-Din al-Afghani,
and Abdul-Rahman Kawakebi and the growth of secret societies, ~
first Christian separatist groups and later movements to reform
Ottoman administration and resist the pan-Turkish movement.*’
Ottoman entry into World War I provided the situation and the
Arab Revolt the catalyst for a coherent nationalist movement
that, a half-century later, is still shaping the politics of the area.
A student of Arab nationalism, Hazem Nuseibeh, has written:
The living and inspiring history of the Arab Rebellion of 1916 was as
worthy a title deed as any to nationhood. No one who lived through
that experience or has read its literature can fail to be impressed by
the genuineness, the depth, and the idealism of its architects as well as
of its rank-and-file adherents. . . . [It] marked a new milestone in
the ideological development of Arab nationalism.8
The collision of French, English, Zionist, and Arab interests in
the aftermath of the fighting has been thoroughly analyzed else-
where, but it is well to emphasize the strength of the Arab national
feeling and not simply the weakness of its political institutions.*
The existence of strong Arab nationalist sentiment and resentment
at French sponsorship of an “artificial” Greater Lebanon were
perfectly apparent to observers on the spot throughout the period
1918-1920, when these critical decisions were being taken. In
October 1918, for example, a local observer in Beirut reported:

=== PDF_PAGE 61 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 41
Since the proclamation, October 1st, 1918, of the Cherifian Government,
the Moslem population here have entertained the hope of the constitu-
tion of an independent Mohammedan Empire. The Mohammedans,
without exception, prefer a purely independent Arabian Government,
without any foreign protection or intervention in their affairs.
If foreign protection were inescapable, the observer added, “all
the Moslems prefer British protection; they hate France.” Further-
more, the Greek Orthodox and the Druzes, harboring their own
suspicions of Catholic domination, also preferred the British or
the Americans. The King-Crane investigation of summer 1919
recognized the dangers inherent in a solution that flouted nascent
Arab national feeling. Of the 1,863 petitions received by the
Commission in Syria, 203 (of which 196 were from Lebanon)
supported the idea of an independent Greater Lebanon, and 1,062
were against it.°’ It recommended that the Lebanon have con-
siderable local autonomy but only as a constituent part of a large
Syrian state, on the grounds that such a state would find tolerance
of minorities in its national interest, that a small Christian state
outside it would be vulnerable to hostility, and that the better-
educated Christians would contribute more fully to the development
of the area if they had a stake in it.’ The King-Crane recommen-
dations, however, were ignored by the diplomats. A few months
later, in early March 1920, the Syrian General Congress audaciously
proclaimed the complete independence and unity of Syria, in-
cluding autonomy for old Mount Lebanon. But, at the San Remo
Conference of April 19-26, Great Britain and France disclosed
their very different plans.
Syria was to be broken up into three separate fractions: Palestine, the
Lebanon, and a reduced “Syria” consisting of what was left. [The de-
cisions] gave birth to a new sentiment in the Arab world—that of con-
tempt for the Powers of the West. It was not only the denial of the two
cherished goals of independence and unity that provoked the revulsion
of feeling, but also, and more profoundly, the breach of faith.
Syrian resistance was feeble, and, at the town of Maisaloun on
July 24, French troops and artillery brought Faisal’s rule in Syria
to an end.** France had temporarily defeated the Arab nation-
alist forces, and the Maronites of Lebanon were relieved, but the
tensions remained. Greater Lebanon was regarded by at least a
sizable minority of its inhabitants—mostly Sunnites but to a

=== PDF_PAGE 62 ===
42 * STRESSES
lesser extent Druzes, Shiites, and Greek Orthodox—as a state of
dubious legitimacy.”
Political life during the two decades of Mandate rule reflected
the disaffection of the Sunnites. They refused to participate in
the new institutions, which they believed, with some justice, to be
weighted against their interests. The revolt of 1925-1927 in
Syria and growing tension in Palestine aggravated the anti-Western
feelings of Sunnite Arabs throughout the area, including Lebanon.
The High Commissioner felt obliged to intervene incessantly in
the politics of the new Republic. Twice he suspended the Consti-
tution altogether—from May 4, 1932, to January 1, 1934, and
from September 21, 1939, to September 21, 1943.5° Further-
more, even within the tight circle of officially approved Christian
notables a cleavage began to appear between a Francophile fac-
tion supported by the Maronite Church and a group seeking genuine
independence from the Mandatory as soon as possible. The former
was headed by Emile Edde and the latter by Bechara al-Khoury.
The Khoury group saw the urgent necessity of integrating Arab
nationalist Sunnite notables into the political institutions of the
state to preserve its viability once independence was achieved,
and it took pains to cultivate the support of these notables and
to wean them from rigid insistence that an independent Lebanese
entity be merged into a united Syria. The survival of the Lebanese
Republic after independence in 1943 is a measure of the achieve-
ment of this group of liberal Christians. By the same token, the
weakness of a national consensus and the delicate balance of ten-
sions that characterize politics in this era reflect the continuing
magnitude of Lebanon’s political identity crisis.
Independence and a Pragmatic Accommodation
The events of the late 1930s and early 1940s brought the in-
habitants of Lebanon closer together politically than ever before
or since. Rising currents of pan-Arabism and Christian Lebanese
nationalism found a common foe in the Mandatory Power. The
deterioration of France’s popularity might have been arrested
had the French Parliament ratified the draft Treaty of Amity of
1936; but even that liberalizing measure conceded less than Muslim
opinion desired. The capitulation of France in June 1940 made
the status of her mandated territories ambiguous and her control
tenuous. Lebanon and Syria became a twilight area, competed for

=== PDF_PAGE 63 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 43
by the Vichy government, the British, and the Free French of
General de Gaulle. Alarmed by the possibility of German exploi-
tation, Britain and the Free French expelled the Vichy admin-
istration in June and July 1941 and promised the people of Syria
and Lebanon full independence. This promise, although explicit,
proved premature, and for more than two years the area remained
under the control of the Free French and the British military
mission. The _ historic rivalry between these two allies, however,
was very great, and the local forces demanding independence were
not slow to take advantage of it. During the spring and summer
of 1943, the elements demanding genuine independence and
closer connections with the Arab world gained strength at the
expense of the Free French and the Francophile notables, with
the obvious encouragement of the British Minister, Major-General
Sir Edward Spears. In one case, a French-inspired attempt to en-
franchise Lebanese emigrants—mostly Christian—in the reluc-
tantly promised parliamentary election was thwarted by elements
enjoying British support: the Muslim Arab leadership and the pro-
independence Christian faction.°® The election itself set the stage
for the autumn crisis out of which emerged the independent Re-
public. Despite French interference, the candidates supporting
Bechara al-Khoury gained complete control of the Chamber,” and
a new era in Lebanese politics began.
Bechara al-Khoury was elected President of the Republic on
September 21, 1943. He faced the double problem built into the
very structure of Greater Lebanon: internal parochialism and for-
eign interference, and he faced it in a particularly acute form. The
unsettled circumstances of the time had accelerated both the desires
of the independence factions and the fears of conservative Christians.
Some of the former certainly hoped for eventual political reunifica-
tion with Syria, whereas others sought simply to throw off the French
control; some of the latter wanted to reconstitute an entirely Chris-
tian Mount Lebanon under French protection, whereas others sought
to maintain a Francophile ruler in Greater Lebanon. Sunnites,
Shiites, and Druzes entertained well-founded suspicions that cer-
tain Maronite elements wanted to seize the reins from the retiring
Délégué-Geéneral, and Maronites suspected, not without reason, that
the Sunnite leadership might betray Lebanon’s sovereignty and
commit the Christians to a feared Islamic domination. It was
Khoury’s overriding political task to deal with this double problem.

=== PDF_PAGE 64 ===
44 * STRESSES
That he did so immediately and decisively is to his credit as a
statesman and to the credit of the notables of all sects who joined
with him.
The instrument for dealing with the identity problem has come
to be known as the National Pact (al-mithaq al-watani). Although
the National Pact hardly constitutes a solution, it has for two
decades been the fundamental institution in the Lebanese political
system for coping with the problem. Without this pragmatic ac-
commodation, it is doubtful that the state could have survived as
long as it has. The National Pact was an agreement between the
new President, a Maronite Christian, and the popular Sunnite
Muslim politician Riad Sulh, a pan-Arab nationalist. It stipulated
that Lebanon should be completely independent, sovereign, and neu-
tral; that Christians, especially Maronites, should not seek Western
protection; and that Muslims, especially Sunnites, should not try to
make Lebanon part of a larger Arab Islamic state. Lebanon should
have an Arab “face” while retaining a separate identity. The new
state should develop a role in the Arab world and cooperate fully
with all the other Arab states, especially Syria, providing that they
recognize her boundaries. Finally, the government should work to
eliminate the sectarian system, which, as Riad Sulh put it, “is an
obstacle to national progress, impeding the representation of the
national will and poisoning the good relations between diverse ele-
ments of the Lebanese population.” °° Nevertheless, the Pact for-
malized the practice of allocating the top political offices on a sec-
tarian basis, and since then the practice has been accorded the
status of a firm tradition.*' Whereas the amended Constitution of
1926 is the constitution of what Rondot has called the pays légal,
the National Pact is the constitution of the pays réel. The Pact, how-
ever, is a remedy for the symptoms of sectarian strife rather than a
cure. The bargain between Sunnites and Maronites has proven in-
creasingly difficult to maintain in the domain of foreign relations,
and the intention of its authors to eliminate sectarianism has yet to
be realized. Proportional representation by sect remains an essential
element of the formal system. Nevertheless, the National Pact ac-
complished the task of recruiting the Muslim notables into the
system and excluding extremists, whether Christian, Muslim, pan-
Arab, or pro-Western, from the arena of legitimate political be-
havior. Historic mutual suspicions still lie beneath the surface of
politics, but the fact remains that an area of negative consensus has

=== PDF_PAGE 65 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 45
been established by means of the Pact. It has permitted Lebanon
to embark gingerly on a process of political modernization.
The National Pact, as outlined by Bechara al-Khoury and Riad
Sulh, displeased the Free French, who, despite previous promises of
independence, wished to maintain their influential position in the
area against the British and hostile local forces. When the new gov-
ernment followed up on its own declaration of independence by
unilaterally abrogating the provisions in the Constitution that ex-
pressed dependence on the Mandatory, General de Gaulle’s Délégue-
Général, Jean Helleu, imprisoned the President, the Prime Minister,
and all but two members of the Cabinet and installed the Fran-
cophile Emile Edde as chief of state.
Public reaction to this coup de thédtre was so hostile that General
Catroux was sent from Algiers to stabilize the situation. All political
forces in the country, with the exception of the extreme Francophile
Maronites, denounced the high-handed French action and mobilized
in protest. The Maronite Patriarch, Antoun Arida; the Sunnite Grand
Mufti of Lebanon, Toufic Khaled; the largely Maronite youth group,
the Kataeb; and its Sunnite counterpart, the Najjadeh, stood to-
gether in opposition. Notables of all the major communities sup-
ported the “resistance government,” composed of the two Cabinet
members who had eluded arrest. Demonstrations took place in all
the major towns, and French Senegalese troops fired on the crowds.”
General Catroux’s mediation and strong Anglo-American pressure
led to the reinstatement of the Khoury regime on November 22 amid
general popular rejoicing.** The November crisis stamped a seal of
legitimacy on the National Pact.
By grappling with the problem of national integration in 1943,
the Lebanese Republic made it possible subsequently to walk a
tightrope, balancing various internal and external pressures and
avoiding the chronic danger of chaos and fragmentation. Yet neither
political sectarianism nor the National Pact has stimulated a strong
civic spirit among the Lebanese people. Indeed, sectarianism is
widely regarded among the Lebanese as detrimental to developing
national feeling, and the National Pact cannot but represent a
second-best arrangement for the numerous extremists on both the
“Arab” and the “Western” sides. Unsatisfactory as they may be, how-
ever, both institutions have been indispensable to Lebanon’s post-
war survival and its modest political success. The leitmotiv of
politics under the independent Republic has been the struggle to

=== PDF_PAGE 66 ===
46 * STRESSES
make these defective institutions work satisfactorily. It is an un-
ending struggle, for the pressures of parochial and external elements
are constantly changing and generally increasing in intensity. The
unevenness of social mobilization among the sects and regions,
described in Chapter 2, exerts strains on the sectarian ratios con-
trived by the men of 1943; the postwar instability of the Arab world,
aggravated by the Palestine problem, has subjected Lebanon to
capricious gales of discontent and intrigue; and the gradual aliena-
tion of progressive elements in the Arab world from the West has
made Lebanon’s historic position in two worlds more difficult to
maintain. In light of these adversities, the performance of the
Lebanese political system during its first two decades of inde-
pendence seems more impressive than it otherwise might.

=== PDF_PAGE 67 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 47
NOTES
*“In a country like ours, composed of minorities that are already approxi-
mately equal and equally jealous of their rights, where no single element can
hope to constitute a dominant majority, where there can be no question of a
dictatorial regime—the only possible peace is one arrived at by consent, based
on understanding and cooperation, on a state of equilibrium.” Le Jour (Bei-
tut), November 28, 1941.
* Sidney Verba, “Comparative Political Culture,” in Lucian Pye and Sid-
ney Verba (eds.), Political Culture and Political Development (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1965), po5i3.
3 Tbid., p. 525; Verba makes this point at a more general level: “To con-
centrate only on shared beliefs might lead one to overlook situations where
significant political beliefs were held only by certain groups, and where the
very fact that these attitudes were not shared by most members of the sys-
tem was of crucial importance.”
* Although both elements were present long before this period, the inter-
nationalization of Lebanese politics and the modernization of its society on
_ a large scale accompanied the reign of the next-to-last Chehabi amir, Bashir
II. For a discussion of this period see William R. Polk, The Opening of South
Lebanon, 1788-1840 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963),
especially pp. xv—xx, 213-26. He argues that the Egyptian occupation of the
1830s laid the foundations for the modern age. “It was a decade which cut
like a band across the spectrum of Syrian history and began the modern
epoch.): .%:" ((p.. 226).
5 Carleton Coon, Caravan (New York: Holt, 1951).
6 The term “primordial sentiments” is Clifford Geertz’s. See “The Integrative
Revolution,” in C. Geertz (ed.), Old Societies and New States (New York:
Free Press, 1963), pp. 105-57, especially his analysis of Lebanon, pp. 142-
ie
7 Raphael Patai, “The Middle East as a Culture Area,” Middle East Journal,
6 (Winter 1952), 1-21.
8 One of the best descriptions of traditional modes of kinship and conflict
resolution is in Victor Ferris Ayoub, Political Structure of a Middle East
Community: A Druze Village of Mount Lebanon (Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation, Harvard University, 1955).
9 Etienne de Vaumas, “La Répartition Confessionnelle au Liban et l’Equi-
libre de l’Etat Libanais,” Revue de Géographie Alpine, 43, No. 3 (1955), 511.
10 Jliya F. Harik, Political Change in a Traditional Society: A Study of In-
stitutional Conflict in the Iqta‘ Political System of Mount Lebanon, 1711-
1845 (Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Chicago, 1964), chap.
1; p. 63.
ttH atik (ibid., p. 47) describes the igta‘ order during Ottoman times under
the local Chehab dynasty: “[A] number of hereditary lords exercised the right
to rule and were subject in their relations to a hereditary of the Shihab
dynasty.” Harik distinguishes between the system of tax farming (iltizam),
which prevailed generally throughout the areas of the Ottoman Empire that

=== PDF_PAGE 68 ===
48 * STRESSES
were firmly controlled by the Sultan’s prefects, and the igfa’ system, in which
tax-collection functions were more locally controlled, as in Mount Lebanon.
See also Polk, op. cit., pp. 32-49, for a detailed description.
12 The Chehab family ruled in and around Mount Lebanon from 1697 to
1841. The double ga’imagamiyyah (1842-1858) was an administrative solution
proposed by Prince Metternich to restore order among sects and _ classes.
It divided the Lebanon into Christian and Druze districts but proved insuffi-
cient to end the turmoil. The mutasarrifiyyah (1861-1920) was the arrange-
ment, sponsored by the Great Powers, that placed Lebanon under a governor
(mutasarrif) who was a non-Lebanese Catholic appointed by the Porte and
approved by the Powers.
13 Polk, op. cit., chap. 4. For a discussion of peasant unrest under the
double ga’imagamiyyah, see Malcolm H. Kerr, Lebanon in the Last Years of
Feudalism, 1840-1868 (Beirut: American University, 1959), particularly his
introduction to a chronicle of the period, pp. 1-31.
14 Afif I. Tannous, “The Village in the National Life of Lebanon,” Middle
East Journal, 3 (April 1949), 151-64.
15 Albert Hourani, “Race, Religion, and Nation-State in the Near East,” in
his collection of papers, A Vision of History (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1961), pp.
72-3.
16 Harik, op. cit., passim, especially chap. 5 on the political ideology of the
Maronites.
17 See Chapter 2 for a further discussion of demographic trends and prob-
lems.
18 We confine ourselves here to the sectarian groups represented in Par-
liament. There are also numerous very small sects, mostly Christian. One of
the best treatments of the sects in Syria and Lebanon is by one of the fore-
most scholars of the area, Albert Hourani, Minorities in the Arab World
(London: Oxford, 1947). See also Hourani’s essay, “Race, Religion, and
Nation-State in the Near East,” in A Vision of History, pp. 71-105.
19 Vaumas, op. cit., p. 515. See also Harik, op. cit., pp. 10-1; Philip K.
Hitti, Lebanon in History (New York: Macmillan, 1957), pp. 247-52; and
Hourani, Minorities in the Arab World, p. 65.
20 Hitti, op. cit., p. 249.
21 Vaumas, op. cit., p. 517.
22 Harik, op. cit., p. 27; and Vaumas, op. cit., p. 524.
23 Kamal Salibi, The Modern History of Lebanon (London: Weidenfeld,
1965), p. 106.
24 'Vaumas, op. cit., pp. 526-7; and Hourani, Syria and Lebanon (London:
Oxford, 1946), p. 124.
25 Vaumas, op. cit., pp. 529-32.
26 Salibi, “Lebanon since the Crisis of 1958,” World Today, 17 (January
196Ey 3 5-
27 Vaumas, op. cit., pp. 532-S.
?8 Lebanon’s small Jewish community lives peacefully in a district of Beirut
and observes its religious practices in freedom. The Jews of Lebanon speak
Arabic and operate a number of important business establishments. Too
few to be represented in formal. political institutions, the Jews enjoy good

=== PDF_PAGE 69 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 49
relations with the Maronite-dominated party, the Kataeb, which publicly
guaranteed their security during the Palestine war. Despite the deep enmity
that most Lebanese, Christian and Muslim, feel toward Israel, the Lebanese
Jewish community has rarely suffered. Some Arab nationalists in Lebanon,
however, regard Jewish land purchases and stock-market activity with con-
siderable suspicion.
*® Hourani, Syria and Lebanon, p. 122.
_ *°Vaumas, op. cit., pp. 543-8. For one recent description, see Richard
Pearse, Three Years in the Levant (London: Macmillan, 1949), pp. 234-40.
31 Salibi, The Modern History of Lebanon, pp. xvii-xviii.
82 Hitti, Origins of the Druze People and Religion (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1928), Diiaads
33 On the decline of the Druzes and the rise of the Maronites, see Salibi,
The Modern History of Lebanon, especially chaps. 1, 5; Harik, op. cit.,
chap. S; and Polk, op. cit., chap. 8.
34 Salibi, The Modern History of Lebanon, p. xii. It should be noted,
however, that many Christians, and especially the more conservative Maron-
ites, make a point of tracing their origins back to the Phoenicians, in order
to score a political point against Sunnite Arab nationalists, who are relative
latecomers, and, by implication, aliens.
*° Godfrey de Bouillon led the Crusader expedition that founded the King-
dom of Jerusalem in 1099, and Raymond de St. Gilles established the
County of Tripoli in 1102. There is also a Maronite legend that a grandson
of Charlemagne’s uncle landed in the Levant and became abbot of the
monastery of St. Maron and that he took the name of Yuhanna Maroun,
patron saint of the Maronite Church. René Ristelhueber, Les Traditions
Frangaises au Liban (Paris: Alcan, 1925), p. 42-6.
36 One of the most vivid accounts of the Anglo-French struggle is found
in the writings of Colonel Charles Henry Churchill, Mount Lebanon: A
Ten Year’s Residence from 1842-1852, 1 (London: Saunders, 1853), 275,
315-22.
37 Polk, op. cit., pp. 83-105, describes the invasion, drawing upon local
chronicles and consular reports.
38 Eugéne Poujade, Le Liban et la Syrie, 1845-1860 (3d ed.; Paris: Lévy,
1867), pp. 19-36, 59. See also J. A. R. Marriott, The Eastern Question
(4th ed.; Oxford: Clarendon, 1940), pp. 225-44.
39 See, for example, Memorandum sur les Aspirations des Libanais (Cairo:
Alliance Libanaise, January 8, 1918) issued by the Alliance Libanaise, a
group of expatriate Lebanese founded in November 1909. Originally the
group’s aim was to secure the continued autonomy of Mount Lebanon
within the Ottoman Empire. When Constantinople abrogated the international
agreement providing for Mount Lebanon’s autonomy and reduced it to an
ordinary province during World War I, the Alliance began a campaign to
secure the complete independence of an enlarged and economically viable
Lebanon, corresponding roughly to the territory of the present Republic,
which would have international guarantees. See also the Comité Libanais
de Paris, Compte Rendu de l Assemblée Constitutive du 24 Janvier 1918;
and the report of E. H. Byrne, Desires of the Syrians, October 7, 1918,. pp:

=== PDF_PAGE 70 ===
50 * STRESSES
68-78. All these documents may be found in the William Yale papers at Yale
University. Yale was technical adviser to the King-Crane Commission (The
American Section of the International Commission on Mandates in Turkey)
in Syria.
40 The Yale papers provide an informed and detailed account both of the
aspirations of the several religious and ethnic minorities and of the actual
confrontation among Chukri Pasha Ayoubi, the Sherifian authority in Beirut,
the French Rear Admiral Vernet, and the British General Bullfin during
the first ten days of October 1918. See also Zeine N. Zeine, The Struggle
for Arab Independence (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1960), pp. 25-41; Harry N.
Howard, The King-Crane Commission (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1963), especially
pp. 125-35; and the report of the King-Crane Commission itself in U.S.
Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States: Paris Peace
Conference, 1919, XII (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1947), 745-863, especially 751-99.
41 The definitive work in English on the Mandate era is Stephen H. Long-
rigg, Syria and Lebanon under French Mandate (London: Oxford, 1958).
A vivid, if jaundiced, narrative in Arabic is Iskandar Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d
(Beirut: 1953). Both books are rather unkind to the French. A well-informed
French analysis of the era will be found in Pierre Rondot, Les Institutions
Politiques du Liban (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, 1947).
42 Michel Chiha, Politique Intérieure (Beirut: Trident, 1964), is a repre-
sentative selection of the author’s editorials in Le Jour.
43 American University of Beirut Department of Political Studies and Public
Administration, The Lebanese Constitution: A Reference Edition in English
Translation (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1960).
44 George Grassmuck and Salibi, A Manual of Lebanese Administration
(Beirut: American University, 1955), pp. 6-11.
45 Hazem Zaki Nuseibeh, The Ideas of Arab Nationalism (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1956), p. 42.
46 Sati al-Hosri, one of the leading publicists of contemporary Arab na-
tionalism, states that neither the Wahhabite reform movement in Islam,
which began in Arabia in the 1820s, nor Muhammad Ali’s enlightened
despotism in Egypt was directly responsible for this revival. It was, he ar-
gues, the Christian missionaries who nurtured the minority that was dis-
contented with Ottoman rule. “C’est au Liban qu’est Née l’Idée Nation-
aliste,” L’Orient Littéraire (Beirut), June 9, 1962.
*" George Antonius, The Arab Awakening (London: Hamilton, 1938),
especially pp. 35-60, 79-125. For a critical review of Antonius, see George
Kirk, “The Arab Awakening Reconsidered,” Middle Eastern Affairs, 13
(June-July 1952), 162-73. Kirk argues that Arab nationalism was a less
popular movement than Antonius suggests. See also Sylvia Haim, Arab Na-
tionalism: An Anthology (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1964),
pp. 3-72; and Hans Kohn, Nationalism and Imperialism in the Hither East
(New York: Harcourt, 1932), pp. 179 ff.
48 Nuseibeh, op. cit., p. 54.
* Zeine, op. cit., is one of the best accounts. See also Laurence Evans,

=== PDF_PAGE 71 ===
Obstacles to National Integration + 51
United States Policy and the Partition of Turkey, 1914-1924 (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Press, 1965).
5° William Yale, Notes and Translations Prepared for Me by Local Friends
in Beyrouth, Yale papers.
51 King-Crane Report, in U.S. Department of State, op. cit., pp. 756-62.
52 Howard, op. cit., pu233.
53 Antonius, op. cit., p. 305.
54 Zeine, op. cit., pp. 136-88.
5° As Hourani has put it: “Gradually there grew up an idea of Lebanese
nationalism, but so long as the French remained in control the concept was
largely artificial. Arab nationalists both inside and outside Lebanon resented
its existence as part of the process of dividing and subjecting the Arab
world, and the other sects resented the predominance which French support
gave to the Maronites.” Hourani, “The Decline of the West in the Middle
East—I,” International Affairs, 29 (1953), 37-8.
°6 For some examples of interference, see Riachi, op. cit., passim. The
Rapport et Motion du Congrés National Démocrate du Liban, held at Beirut,
November 27, 1938, accuses the High Commissioner of nominating deputies,
of interfering in the elections of 1929 and 1934 and of holding the 1937
_ elections in a reign of terror. It declares that the Commissioner had spent
millions of francs to buy off the deputies and had also interfered in the
Presidential election of 1936 to ensure Emile Edde’s victory. See also Camille
Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris: Gallimard, 1963), pp. 83-90; and
Longrigg, op. cit., pp. 199-207.
°7 Leaflets dropped over Beirut on June 8, 1941, and signed by General
Georges Catroux, proclaimed Lebanon’s independence and the end of the
Mandate. For the text and his own commentary, see Catroux, Dans la
Bataille de la Méditerranée (Paris: Julliard, 1949), pp. 137-56. See also
Eugénie Elie Abouchdid, Thirty Years of Lebanon and Syria: 1917-1947
(Beirut: Sader-Rihani, 1948), pp. 83 ff.
58 General de Gaulle’s view of the situation is presented in his Mémoires
de Guerre: Unité, 1942-1944 (Paris: Plon, 1956), pp. 238 ff. Spears’ position
is described in the dispatches of the American Diplomatic Agent and Consul
General at Beirut, George Wadsworth, in U.S. Department of State, Foreign
Relations of the United States, 1943, TV (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1964), especially 976-84.
59 Wadsworth reported, “Interventions and pressures by French and French-
supported Lebanese regional officials continued—even increasing according
to Spears—but were in considerable measure effectively blocked by latter's
energetic protests and counter measures.” Ibid., p. 988, Despatch 266, Sep-
tember 3, 1943.
60 As the National Pact was never written down as a formal document,
there is a certain ambiguity in its precise terms. This ambiguity undoubtedly
has contributed to its success as an operational principle. In describing it,
I rely principally on President Khoury’s inaugural speech to Parliament of
September 21, 1943, and the ministerial declaration by Riad Sulh on Oc-
tober 7, 1943. In his memoirs, Hagda’iq lubnaniyyah [Lebanese Truths], I

=== PDF_PAGE 72 ===
52 * STRESSES
(Beirut: Awraq lubnaniyyah, 1960), 15-6, President Khoury describes his
address. Before cheering deputies and visitors, he asserted that Lebanon must
cooperate with the Arab countries and emerge from its isolation: “My ex-
pression of [this policy] received the complete support [of Parliament] and
the session adjourned in an intense atmosphere of enthusiasm.” Other pub-
lic declarations of the National Pact by the President are found in an ap-
pendix, pp. 289-99. The text of Riad Sulh’s speech is reprinted in Le Jour,
October 8, 1943.
61The agreement that the President should be a Maronite, the Prime
Minister a Sunnite, and the Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies a Shiite
is perhaps too arbitrary and too recent to be classified as a tradition. Greater
Lebanon’s first President, Charles Debbass (1926-1934) was Greek Ortho-
dox. Sunnites had no high-level representation at all until the selection of
Khaireddine Ahdab as Prime Minister in 1937. Another Sunnite, Shaykh
Muhammad al-Jisr of Tripoli, however, had sought the Presidency in 1932.
So popular was Jisr that Emile Edde, a prominent and ambitious Maronite,
supported him, thinking that he would defeat Edde’s rival, Bechara al-
Khoury. The French High Commissioner, Henri Ponsot, believed that =a
Muslim president would not serve France’s interest, even though Jisr had
cooperated with the French, and he suspended the Constitution to prevent
Jisr’s election. It was only in 1943 that a Shiite became President of the
Chamber. Rondot, op. cit., pp. 15-6; Chamoun, op. cit., p. 84; Ahmad
Haidar, Al-dawlah al-lubndniyyah [The Lebanese State] (Beirut: Nijmeh,
1954).
62 Wadsworth reports that Amir Majid Arslan asked “How can you ex-
pect me to control the Druzes?” The Maronite Patriarch called the French
move a coup de folie. The Mufti asked, “Are we slaves?” Habib Abuchahla,
a Greek Orthodox notable and one of the two cabinet members at large,
protested, along with Arslan, France’s “illegal and brutal acts” and the “vio-
lation of our independence and constitution and of principles for which
the Allies are fighting.” U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the
United States, 1943, IV, 1013-9, Despatch 311, November 11, 1943.
68 For a day-by-day account of these events, see Abouchdid, op. cit., pp.
133-71. See also Le Jour, November 25, 1943, for a résumé (during the
crisis the newspapers had been shut down). Also see Catroux, op. cit., pp.
400-28; De Gaulle, op. cit., pp. 239-44; and Longrigg, op cit., pp. 328-
33. Longrigg comments: “A bitter blow to French prestige had been sus-
tained. It had been invited by her weakness, her disproportionate preten-
sions, and a particular act of gross impolicy, and there was to be, this time,
not even a facade of recovery from it. . . .” (p. 333)
