=== PDF_PAGE 73 ===
CHAPTER + 2
Social Mobilization in Lebanon
Lebanese citizens are no longer surprised to hear that Lebanon
- 1s a society in movement. Movement is evident in the demand for
telephone lines, the rate of construction of luxury apartments, the
growth of shantytowns around Beirut, and, not least, the awesome
traffic jams that clog Beirut’s narrow streets and the approaches to
the city. Per capita income has risen from $362 in 1958 to $449 in
1963. The booming tourist industry pours foreign currencies not
only into Beirut but also into the surrounding mountain resorts. Out-
side Greater Beirut and in the enclaves of poverty inside it, this
kind of movement is greatly diminished. Although the transistor
radio is ubiquitous, the other signs of modernization are less
noticeable: Education, avenues of physical and social mobility,
steady employment, and health services are not readily available
outside the core area. Just as some regions and sectors are more
favored than others, so are various aspects of modernization occur-
ring at a faster rate than others. For example, urbanization is out-
running industrialization; exposure to mass media is outrunning
formal education; and the supply of secondary and university grad-
uates is exceeding the demand for their services. Though the socio-
economic changes in Lebanon are occurring rapidly, they are also
occurring unevenly throughout the society. How is this situation
relevant to the political system?
This question is one of the most intriguing in comparative
politics.! One of the most illuminating approaches is that of Karl W.
Deutsch, who has conceived of modernization as a process of social
mobilization. Social mobilization is
58)

=== PDF_PAGE 74 ===
54 * STRESSES
. an overall process of change, which happens to substantial parts
of the population in countries which are moving from traditional to
modern ways of life. ... It... brackets together a number of
more specific processes of change, such as changes of residence, or
occupation, of social setting, of face-to-face contacts, of associates, of
institutions, roles and ways of acting, of experiences and expectations,
and finally of personal memories, habits and needs, including the need
for new patterns of group affiliation and new images of personal iden-
tity. . . . Social mobilization can be defined therefore, as the process
in which major clusters of old social, economic, and psychological
commitments are eroded or broken and people become available for
new patterns of socialization and behavior.?
According to Deutsch, the political consequences of rapid social
mobilization may include the following: The politically relevant
stratum will expand, the potential level of political tensions will
increase, politics will be more oriented toward welfare, the gov-
ernment share of the national economy will increase, administration
will be improved, the political elite will be broadened, political
participation by the people will increase, and there will be a shift
away from parochialism and internationalism toward nationalism.
Finally, social mobilization “may tend to strain or destroy the unity
of states whose population is already divided into several groups with
different languages, cultures or basic ways of life.” * Lebanon, as
we have seen, is a divided country; the question of social mobiliza-
tion therefore is particularly relevant for an understanding of its
politics. In order to discover how social mobilization affects Leba-
non’s distinctive political life, it is necessary to examine the trends
more intensively. Three dimensions of social mobilization seem par-
ticularly relevant to our inquiry: demographic trends, economic
trends, and exposure to modernity.
DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS
Compared with India or the United Arab Republic, Lebanon does
not seem to have a population problem, at least not one relevant
to politics; however, Lebanon’s high rate of population increase, its
increasing density, and its rapid urbanization are changing the politi-
cal environment. These trends in fact underlie the transformation
that has created two Lebanons: the highly mobilized Lebanon con-
sisting of Beirut and Mount Lebanon Provinces and the Lebanon

=== PDF_PAGE 75 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 55
that includes the provinces of North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and
the Biqa—an area just beginning to feel the effects of social mobili-
zation (see Map 2).
In describing this demographic shift it is necessary to say a word
about Lebanon’s statistical problem. There has not been a general
census since 1932, and the last year for which reasonably reliable
data is available is 1943, the year the British 7th Army carried out a
survey based on food-ration cards. Although various departments of
the government have made regular estimates, based on rates cal-
culated for the 1932-1943 period and from municipality rolls,
these estimates cannot be regarded as highly accurate.’ This statisti-
cal delinquency reflects the precariousness of the myth of sectarian
balance upon which Lebanon’s political system rests. This myth, it
will be recalled, sanctions the allocation of political positions on
the assumption that Christians outnumber Muslims by approximately
six to five. If today a census should reveal that non-Christians are
- in a majority—and there are good reasons for thinking that it would
—the existing movement to change or abolish the sectarian propor-
tions in the Parliament and administration might develop greater
momentum. The mere anticipation of such increased pressure, it
is feared, would be sufficient to excite sectarian anxiety. Because
social mobilization seems to accentuate rather than smother certain
unpleasant historical memories, notables and groups with an in-
terest in preserving the status quo have sought to soft-pedal the
question of a census; and only a few groups outside the establish-
ment—like the Najjadeh, an Islamic party—have called openly for
a census. The heavily Maronite Kataeb (Phalanges Libanaises) has
already agreed to a census, but only if Lebanese emigrants—number-
ing over a million and largely Christian—are counted along with
resident citizens of Lebanon and non-Lebanese residents (mostly
Muslim) are excluded from the census. Many Lebanese regard the
official attitude toward a census as hypocritical, detrimental to na-
tional development, and possibly dangerous in the long run; others,
however, are more concerned about short-run stability and are con-
tent to maintain the status quo.
There is some basis in fact for thinking that Muslims are in-
creasing in number faster than Christians. Kingsley Davis studied the
more reliable statistics for Palestine, assuming they would reflect
demographic patterns also found in Lebanon, and he found that the
rate of increase of Palestinian Muslims was 28.6 per 1,000 whereas
that of Christians was only 19.5.° Although the Muslims’ death rate

=== PDF_PAGE 76 ===
Sastre) |
56 * STRESSES
0 a 10 20
———————Es |} =
+ MILES — os
hemmed Province Boundary
fool District Boundary
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
Map 2
Provinces and Main Towns of Lebanon
After Etienne de Vaumas, “La Répartition Confessionelle au Liban et l’Equilibre
de Etat Libanais,” Revue de Géographie Alpine, 43 (1955), 511-603.

=== PDF_PAGE 77 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon « 57
was higher than the Christians’, the Muslims’ birth rate was a great
deal higher. Similar evidence has been reported by David Yaukey.
He found little difference between rural Christians and rural Mus-
lims, but educated and uneducated urban Muslims showed fertility
rates of 5.56 and 7.35, respectively, whereas the corresponding
figures for urban Christians were 3.44 and 4.14. Christians in
_ general have made the transition to the limited family model more
readily than have Muslims.°
Lebanon, with an area of 10,400 square kilometers, is roughly four-
fifths the size of Connecticut. In 1932, 756,000 people lived there, and
the population density was 72 per square kilometer. In 1943, the pop-
ulation was 1,022,000 and the density was 101; the annual rate of in-
crease of Lebanese residents had been around 2.6 per cent.” For subse-
quent years there is less agreement. Figures released by the Census
Directorate in 1963 recorded a 4.24 per cent annual increase be-
tween 1951, when the population was 1,416,000, and 1961, when
it was 2,150,526; these figures, however, include overseas Lebanese
who opted for Lebanese nationality under the Lausanne Treaty. The
Doxiadis Associates of Athens made a study in 1957 under the
auspices of the U.S. Operations Mission and arrived at a rate of
2.8 per cent for the early 1950s.* Another research mission, the
French Institut International de Recherches et de Formation en Vue
de Développement (IRFED), which was invited to Lebanon by
President Fuad Chehab and which will be discussed in detail in
Chapter 8, arrived at an estimated annual population increase of
2.3 per cent, but this figure seems too low.? The most persuasive
estimate has come from the Lebanese Ministry of Planning. It cal-
culates that the losses from emigration were nearly covered by the
influx of Lebanese from Egypt and other countries and that ur-
banization is probably reducing the birth rate as it does in other
countries. The Ministry therefore contends that the annual rate for
the 1945-1962 period remained at 2.6 per cent and that it will
slow down in the years to come.”°
Three special factors, however, operate against this tendency.
Formerly, emigration siphoned off some of the surplus population,
but in the post-World War II period this safety valve began to
close, largely as a result of tighter immigration and business restric-
tions levied by newly independent African states. Until World War
I, emigration was great, and an estimated 7,500 Lebanese left an-
nually between 1900 and 1914; the outflow reached another peak of
8,000 in 1923. As other countries began to restrict immigration,

=== PDF_PAGE 78 ===
58 * STRESSES
however, it fell to about 1,000 per year. During World War II,
emigration stopped almost entirely, and since then it has averaged
around 3,000 annually. In the period 1951-1959, the annual aver-
age was 2,850. In 1960, the rate of emigration had declined to
2,700.1! Because the restrictive policies of African and Latin Ameri-
can governments have diminished opportunities for Lebanese emi-
grants, the rate of emigration seems to have stabilized at this low
level, even though the basic motivations for emigration—a limited
domestic market, a weak industrial sector, and a high degree of
rural unemployment—remain.
The second factor aggravating the demographic problem is the
high rate of population increase (an estimated 3.5 per cent) among
the Palestinian refugees who live in Lebanese camps. According to
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
(U.N.R.W.A.) figures there were more than 106,000 refugees
living in sixteen camps throughout the country in 1960, out of a
total of 137,000 on the rolls. For the refugees the birth rate is
higher and the death rate lower than for the population in general.
Although the refugees do supply cheap labor, they inevitably add
to the social problems of Beirut, Saida, and Tyre and compete with
Lebanese for the insufficient number of jobs. Given their experience
of past injustice—the origins of which are outside Lebanon—is it
surprising that the refugees are politically volatile?
The third factor that may retard the expected decline in popula-
tion rate is the level of public health. Although they generally get
enough to eat, Lebanese citizens, particularly those living in rural
areas, are subject to a variety of diseases and deficiencies.’ The
Minister of Public Health estimated in 1961 that the infant mortality
rate per 1,000 live births was 120, about five times the American
rate, whereas in rural areas an earlier (1953) study found a rate of
244, Tuberculosis, typhoid, and paratyphoid fever rank highest
among a number of communicable diseases. It is probable, how-
ever, that the level of public health is rising and will rise con-
siderably in the future. The emergence of Beirut as a first-class medi-
cal center, the propensity of young Lebanese to go into medicine,
and the growth of government health services suggest that the rate
of infant and general mortality will continue to fall rapidly.’* In this
mostly Catholic and Muslim country, where fertility is encouraged
by both religious belief and traditional culture, this may well be a
trend to reckon with.
By 1963 there were at least 2,005,000 people living in Lebanon

=== PDF_PAGE 79 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 59
and the population density was at least 193 per square kilometer.”
The population and its density had almost doubled in twenty years
of independence, and 70 per cent of the population is now under
thirty-five years of age. Even if urbanization should gradually re-
duce the rate of population increase, Davis’ prediction in 1956
seems valid:
Our estimated natural increase . . . is not only high itself but it
derives from an extremely high birth rate and a rather high death rate.
Everything we know about contemporary population trends indicates
that such a death rate will probably be brought down rapidly in a
modernizing country such as Lebanon. It can easily be reduced to half
in a few years. If this should happen there is no particular ground for
expecting the birth rate to drop correspondingly. So we have to con-
clude that Lebanon is due for very rapid population growth in the
next few decades unless some catastrophe intervenes.'®
Not only is the gross population of Lebanon rapidly increasing,
but also there is a marked internal migration to urban areas. Beirut
and, to a lesser extent, Tripoli have been population magnets; and
the Beirut-Mount Lebanon area has experienced a rate of popula-
tion growth greater than the rest of the country. In 1922 Beirut was
a charming little port town of 140,000 inhabitants;’” in 1963 the
Greater Beirut area embraced about 800,000 people, 40 per cent of
Lebanon’s entire population. Lebanon’s second city, Tripoli, num-
bered 30,000 in 1914 and 180,000 in 1946.'® In thirty years the
municipality of Bourj-Hammoud has mushroomed from a suburb
of 40,000 people on the northern edge of Beirut to Lebanon’s
third largest town—it has 125,000 people and some of the worst liv-
ing conditions in the Beirut area.'* The rate of change is dramatic.
Whereas the total population increased by 89 per cent between
1943 and 1963, the population of towns of more than 20,000
people increased by 146 per cent. Approximately 28.7 per cent of
the Lebanese lived in towns of more than 20,000 inhabitants in
1943, but in 1963 the percentage was 37.4. If the definition of
urbanization is loosened to include everybody living in agglomera-
tions of 4,000 or over—which seems reasonable given Lebanon’s
degree of modernization and communications exposure—the coun-
try was about 56 per cent urbanized in the early 1960s.° Of the
1,119,000 Lebanese living in towns of 4,000 or more, 74 per cent
live in the Beirut-Mount Lebanon area.
A comparison of the density figures of the five provinces in 1955

=== PDF_PAGE 80 ===
60 * STRESSES
and 1963 reveals the full extent of the population pressure (see
Table 3). Both the population levels and the rates of change in
Beirut and Mount Lebanon provinces are higher than in the outly-
ing areas. Nevertheless, two of the three outlying provinces are in-
TABLE 3
POPULATION DENSITY BY PROVINCE, 1955 AND 1963
PERSONS PER SQUARE KILOMETER
Province L959 1963 Percentage Increase
Mount Lebanon 187 340 84.5
Beirut 18,090 23,034 Dis
South Lebanon 12 137 22.3
North Lebanon 159 191 ZOE
Biga 47 47 0.0
Figures for 1955 from U.S. Operations Mission in Lebanon, Economic Data
for the Ekistic Programme of Lebanon (Beirut: Doxiadis, 1957); figure for
1963 from Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités
de Développement du Liban, I (Beirut: 1960-1961), 45-54.
creasing in density, despite the demographic shift to the cities. Ac-
cording to the IRFED mission, physical mobility is very high in
the Beirut-Mount Lebanon area and much lower in North Lebanon,
South Lebanon, and the Biga.*t The 1943 census estimated that
14.2 per cent of the persons born and living in Mount Lebanon
since 1932 had moved to Beirut, whereas only 3.5 per cent of
those living in the Biqa had moved there. South Lebanon’s physical
mobility was 6.2 per cent whereas North Lebanon’s was only 2.2
per cent.** A study of thirteen villages in the Biga found that nine-
tenths of the villagers lived in the same village from birth to death
and that nearly all those who moved to. the village were from other
Biga villages. This lack of mobility was found over three genera-
tions.** Lebanon is thus afflicted with both urban and rural over-
crowding.
What kinds of political stress do these trends place on Lebanon’s
political system? First, the concentration of people in a region of
great modernity, where exposure to mass communications, political
appeal, and political organization is great, is enlarging the politically
relevant population. Second, the demographic trends raise a host of
administrative problems, ranging from sewage disposal to traffic
regulation and slum control. There is, in particular, an acute shortage

=== PDF_PAGE 81 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon «+ 61
of low-income housing. An architect and city planner acquainted
with these problems summarized the matter this way:
One wonders what Shelley, Dickens, or Bellamy would think of the
bedlam that is Beirut—mid-twentieth century! . . . Too many factors
have collaborated in the past ten to fifteen years, to dim the bright
prospects that the future of Beirut once promised. These factors are:
Caprice; speculation; lack of a civic and governmental participation
in the growth of Beirut; international and regional politics and dy-
namics; prosperity and oil. The rapid interplay of these factors . . .
made Beirut both the enviable city of the Middle East, while at the
same time these same factors have made it the most precariously-dis-
posed, for its future urban-regional posture is not very bright.?4
Third, urbanization appears to fortify, rather than diminish,
Lebanese parochialism and transnational feelings. There is reason
to think that the ‘poorer-class individuals and families experiencing
these demographic changes have not lost their traditional orienta-
tion but, on the contrary, have carried into the core region their
traditional affiliations and attitudes.”? This tendency may reduce
the relevance of the concept of anomic, floating masses that pre-
occupies many sociologists. Insofar as it perpetuates, even fortifies,
sectarian and family particularism as well as pan-Arab longings,
however, it hinders development of common Lebanese loyalties and
public spirit. In the sprawl of “Greater Beirut, sectarian, class, and
political communities cluster together in an uneasy, twentieth-cen-
tury mosaic. Just as the famous “melting pot” has proved to be
more myth than fact in New York City,”° so the crucible of Beirut
does not appear to be molding less particularistic Lebanese citizens.
On the contrary, because political life in the city is corrupt and the
formal political institutions in such an environment appear irrelevant
to political realities, the experience of urbanization may even in-
crease primordial loyalties.
ECONOMIC TRENDS
The Lebanese economy has undergone spectacular development
since World War II. Lebanon appears glutted with material wealth,
in relation both to what it enjoyed before and to what its Arab
neighbors now enjoy. In this light it is easy to ascribe Lebanon’s
relative political success to prosperity. Marxists and non-Marxists

=== PDF_PAGE 82 ===
62 * STRESSES
alike have made convincing presentations of this argument. Mem-
bers of Lebanon’s Community Party, for example, point out that
Lebanon is a capitalist anachronism, in which a fat middle class
rules and enough surplus trickles down to the workers and peasants
to tranquilize their revolutionary spirit. Outstanding Lebanese capi-
talists use the same argument to account for what they consider
to be the country’s economic and political success.
Statistical indicators provide a rough idea of Lebanon’s material
transformation. For example, one of the indicators used to chart
basic development is production of electric energy; Lebanon’s pro-
duction has more than doubled between 1959 and 1962.”" National
income has advanced strongly since independence, allaying a wide-
spread fear among many Lebanese that the little state could not
become self-sustaining, much less grow. Even after the breakup of
the customs union with Syria in March 1950, which greatly aug-
mented this fear, national income increased annually at almost 6.5
per cent. Discounting a 3 per cent increase in the price level, the
net rate of increase was between 5 and 6 per cent. The Doxiadis
Associates’ survey of 1957 plotted this data against the population
rate and estimated an annual increase in per capita income of about
3 per cent.” Estimates for the late 1950s have been a bit lower.
The IRFED group suggested that the annual increase in national
income in 1959 was about 4.4 per cent and that the per capita in-
come increase was about 2.1 per cent. Official statistics for sub-
sequent years show that this rate has in fact been maintained: For
the 1961-1964 period the annual rate of increase remained at 4.4
per cent.” Lebanese Gross National Product in 1963 was ap-
proximately $725 million, compared with $520 million in 1953. Per
capita income, which was placed at $235 in 1950 and $310 in 1956,
was well over $400 in 1963.*°
Other indicators show why Lebanon today seems to exude pros-
perity. Imports have increased markedly, rising from $144 million
in 1953 to $358 million in 1962. About 55 per cent of the imports
come from the United States and Western Europe and include auto-
mobiles, electrical machinery and appliances, and all manner of
luxury goods. It is no exaggeration to say that almost anything for
sale anywhere can be bought in Beirut. If in this enormous pro-
pensity to consume Beirut is the equal of any world capital, it also
generates a huge and increasing trade deficit: $119 million in 1953
and $229 million in 1962. A deficit this size naturally worries many
people, particularly in light of Lebanon’s weak agricultural and in-

=== PDF_PAGE 83 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 63
dustrial sectors, but the surprising fact is that Lebanon has managed
to expand its “invisible exports”—especially its financial and tourist
services—to soak up the trade deficit. American foreign aid from
1952 to 1962, amounting to some $88.3 million, helped in this
respect, but the development—if not overdevelopment—of the trade
and service sectors has been much more important. These sectors
_ were earning together some $200 million annually in the mid-1960s.
Tourism especially has become a major source of income; the num-
ber of tourists and summer vacationers has risen from 179,000 in
1955 to more than 600,500 in 1965.%! Tourism reportedly brings
in about $40 million a year to help offset the unfavorable trade
balance. Since 1950 Lebanon has also derived important revenues
from oil transit and refinery fees.
By far the most important factor in Lebanon’s postwar economic
development is its emergence as a major center of finance. Lebanon’s
growth as a financial center has been spectacular indeed: Before
1951 there were only five banks in Beirut; in 1966 there were
ninety-three. Lebanese prosperity relies on a pool of capital fed to a
large extent by the inflow of funds from the Arabian oil-producing
states, as well as by the remittances from emigrants to their families.
The oil money has been attracted to Lebanon by favorable interest
rates, by a banking-secrecy law modeled after the one in Switzerland,
by the perceived remoteness and complexity of Western money
markets, and by the relative stability of Lebanon’s political situa-
tion. During the 1961 crisis between Iraq and Kuwait, an estimated
$100 million flowed into Beirut banks; and Syrian capitalists are
said to have smuggled out vast amounts to Beirut when the Baath
regime took power. Profiting thus from the political difficulties of
its neighbors, the Lebanese financial situation gives every ap-
pearance of health: The Lebanese pound enjoys 86 per cent gold
coverage; foreign exchange holdings have risen between 1955 and
1965 from $86.5 million to $236 million; and the money supply has
increased from over $80 million in 1954 to nearly $180 million in
1964. The number of American companies has risen from 147 in
1961 to 264 in 1965, a sign of Western confidence.
These indicators of prosperity are impressive, but they are also
deceptive because they mask conditions that impose constant and
perhaps growing strains on the country’s delicate political processes.
Lebanon’s traditional political stability has bestowed the gift of
prosperity, but the maldistribution and possible future diminution of
prosperity challenges that stability. Three types of strain are par-

=== PDF_PAGE 84 ===
64 * STRESSES
ticularly noticeable. First, Lebanon’s dependence on outside invest-
ment is enormous; perhaps in no other country are financial serv-
ices such a large percentage of the gross national product. Yet these
capital inflows can be easily and suddenly diminished by changes in
the world financial situation, by Arab-world politics, or even by
personal whims. The crisis in Beirut’s huge Intra Bank in 1966
made this danger apparent to all. The leftist and anti-Western
tendencies in Arab-world politics exert pressure on Lebanon’s al-
legedly parasitic and artificial prosperity. Lebanon enjoys a prosperity
that is, at best, uncertain.
A second set of strains is imposed by the uneven distribution of
prosperity. This unevenness is not readily apparent in Beirut itself.
The manifestations of the capital inflow appear everywhere around
Beirut and its suburbs; the most impressive indications are, perhaps,
the forest of high-rise luxury apartment buildings. The proliferation
of such buildings, monuments of millionaires, has nearly transformed
Beirut from a romantic town of graceful arches and red roofs to
another jet-age metropolis—a collection of flashy buildings unrelated
to the people or the terrain. Outside the capital proper, however, it
is not difficult to see where the prosperity stops: The Beirut slums
or the depressed areas in South Lebanon are vivid reminders. Less
obvious but no less important is the lack of economic infrastructure
(small factories, low-income housing projects, markets outside
Beirut) that could have been developed with more socially con-
scious investment behavior.
It is possible to obtain a rough picture of Lebanon’s uneven pros-
perity from some recent economic studies. The Doxiadis Associates’
study of 1957 estimated that 3 per cent of the work force, about
14,000 men, earns $3,300 or more annually; 51 per cent earns
$500 or less.** The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organiza-
tion (F.A.O.) study of 1959 suggested that per capita income in
the low-income groups may be only about $147, compared with a
national average of about $327.** The IRFED study of 1960-1961
reported that half the work force is engaged in agriculture, yet only
15.8 per cent of the Gross National Product goes to the agricultural
sector.** The ratio of percentage of national product and percentage
of work force in agriculture is therefore 0.324. At the other extreme
are the people employed in the finance sector; they constitute only
0.44 per cent of the work force but account for 6 per cent of the
Gross National Product—a ratio of 13,623.*°
Although the over-all income distribution of Lebanon is hardly

=== PDF_PAGE 85 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 65
as unequal as that prevailing, say, in Colombia, it does not approach
the more equitable Western levels, as Table 4, derived from the
IRFED Report, indicates. According to IRFED, half the popula-
tion may be classified as “destitute” or “poor” and half as “average”
or better. The half that is “destitute” and “poor” accounts for only
18 per cent of the Lebanese G.N.P.
TABLE 4
INCOME DISTRIBUTION, 1959
Category Percentage of Population Level of Family Income (L£)
“Destitute” 9 1,200 and below (0-$400)
“Poor” 40 1,200-2,500 ($400-$830)
“Average” 30 2,500-5,000 ($830-$1,660)
“Well off” 14 5000-15,000 ($1,660-$5,000)
“Rich” 4 15,000 and above
Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités de Dévelop-
pement du Liban, I (Beirut: 1960-1961), 93.
The regional variations in income distribution are also striking.
IRFED carried out two field studies in Lebanon, one in the rural
areas and one in the major towns; its object was to compare the
level of sociological, psychological, cultural, and economic develop-
ment in all parts of Lebanon. The country was divided into regions,
zones, and subzones, each with its main town, or “polar” locality,
and each subzone was scored in terms of eleven to fourteen indica-
tors of development.*® The various zones were then classified ac-
cording to degree of development as shown by the mean of their
over-all scores. The figures are not based entirely on “hard” data.
They might more accurately be regarded as standardized impressions.
They are good enough, however, to permit rough comparisons.
The findings from the IRFED study indicate that the Central
region (which includes the Beirut suburbs and Mount Lebanon, as
well as the capital) ranks dramatically higher than the other regions
on the IRFED scale of development. Not a single polar locality in
this area is completely undeveloped, and only 5 per cent are under-
developed by the IRFED criteria. By contrast, 46 per cent of the
polar localities of the Northern region, 30 per cent of those in the
Southern region, and 35 per cent of those in the Eastern region
(Biga) fall into the two lowest categories. (The Northern, Southern,
and Eastern regions of the IRFED study correspond closely but not

=== PDF_PAGE 86 ===
66 * STRESSES
exactly with the provinces of North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and
the Biga respectively. The Central region comprises, again ap-
proximately, the Beirut and Mount Lebanon provinces together).* "
Furthermore, the IRFED study makes it possible to specify in
what areas of development the regions are strong and weak. We
find, for example, that the Central region scores high on certain
categories: health levels, school facilities, domestic situation, neigh-
borhood conditions, housing, family situation, educational situation
and psychology, and domestic facilities. It has low scores, however,
in various subzones, in the categories of leisure and cultural ac-
tivities and health facilities. The Northern, Southern, and Eastern
regions all have fairly high scores with respect to the educational
situation and psychology and domestic facilities, but they do very
poorly with respect to leisure and cultural activities, health facilities,
and economic and technical capacity.**
IRFED’s analysis of the four regional urban centers—Beirut,
Tripoli, Saida, and Zahleh—reveals that Beirut is, on the average,
the most developed of the four towns, followed in descending order
by Zahleh, Tripoli, and Saida.*® In domestic facilities and situation,
housing, and leisure activities, Beirut city does very well; in neigh-
borhood life and diverse services it does very poorly; and its health,
urban, educational, and cultural levels are generally acceptable.
Tripoli and Saida, on the other hand, do not rank in the top group
in any respect and are lowest with respect to domestic situation,
neighborhood life, and educational facilities, among others.
Although they are deficient in several areas of development, all
the principal towns of Lebanon are greatly superior to their rural
surroundings. By IRFED’s criteria, every urban center offers a better
standard of living than does its surrounding area. This finding
helps explain the lure of the cities for Lebanon’s rural inhabitants and
thus the accelerating rural-urban migration.
A third set of strains accompanies Lebanon’s extraordinary eco-
nomic development. Lebanon faces an unemployment problem be-
cause it has a fast-growing, youthful population, a rapid rate of
urban migration, a relatively stagnant industrial and agricultural sec-
tor, and the tendency among many hommes daf faires to opt for
short-run gains in their business investments at the expense of long-
run benefits. The job shortage is apparent at all levels, among uni-
versity graduates as well as among the uneducated. Ironically, even
though Lebanon is deficient in administrative skills, liberal-arts
graduates do not find government jobs easily available because of

=== PDF_PAGE 87 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 67
the lack of positions, a situation aggravated by the allocation of
posts according to sectarian considerations. Increased mechanization
in agriculture has reduced the number of jobs that used to exist in
labor-intensive cultivation of Lebanon’s limited soil. Investment in
industrial enterprises does not create enough additional employment
for the approximately 11,000 young men—a conservative estimate
—entering the work force annually. To discover the magnitude of
these strains it is necessary to look a bit more closely at Lebanon’s
demographic trends and its economic performance.
Projections of future unemployment figures are not reassuring. In
fact, experts within the Lebanese government suggest that in 1980
one man out of every three in the active population will be without
work. Because of the inadequacy of available quantitative data, any
forecasts must be unusually tentative, but the implications are too
important to ignore. These government experts predict, on the basis
of a continued 2.6 per cent annual increase in population, that the
active work force, which in 1959 was estimated at 450,000,*! will
have risen in 1980 to 915,000 (the maximum hypothesis) or
870,000 (the minimum hypothesis). The government experts pre-
dict that the percentage of the active population unemployed will be
about one third—34 per cent or 33 per cent.” Few would argue
that the projected size of the active population is too large—if
anything, it is conservative. The projected growth rate of new em-
ployment, however, is less acceptable. The government forecast was
made by analyzing the growth of the three main sectors: agricultural,
industrial, and service. The analysis contends that the agricultural
sector is likely to lose 40,000 to 50,000 jobs by 1980 because the
possibility of cultivating new lands is limited by nature and because
technology is reducing the labor-intensive sector of Lebanese agri-
culture.**
It is more difficult to forecast employment trends in the industrial
sector. The absolute gains have been clear—industrial investment
did increase 15 per cent between 1960 and 1964, and its total value
exceeded $275 million in 1964. The evidence suggests, however,
a certain stagnation. The industrial sector’s share of G.N.P. has
shown no significant increase since 1950; it has remained about
12 or 13 per cent, an unusually low figure for such a highly ur-
banized country. The level of new investment in industry has also
not been particularly striking: In 1950, new investment was valued
at 23 million Lebanese pounds (L£) or 16 per cent of the
value of all industry, whereas in 1963 it was valued at L£22.7

=== PDF_PAGE 88 ===
68 * STRESSES
S S
P 9 6 9 I L y s 3 L T I T
T ' 1
9
9
L V
£ 9 6 1 1 6 0 ° €
9
L v 9 ° 9 ’ S O 8 i t
€ S
U 7 9 6 1 L 9 3 ° 0 9 1 L 7 9
°
1 6 9
O
S
O
L
O
A
S
T V I Y L S N 1 9 6 1 E T S ‘ 6 S 1 0 6 ° S 8 0 9 8 ° C 9 ‘ A y a y j
G N o e
]
¢ O ' y c s r u
a T a v L A H L N
I
0 9 6 1 € 0 r ' 0 s 6 S S ° 7 8 L S r l r o u o s e
p
e
j
S f e
G y
N O C i n
a Y L L N
E
6 5 6 1 € £ 0 ° 6 E Z O E E V E L A C C o A j y e o r s ‘Tr
X O
F Y S o 6 l 1 S
1 c
0 0 7 ‘ E c c
y o
y ‘“SISTIO
d
‘ 9 9 6 1
‘ S
W
O
y e o m
t
I e I N
j o d q u b
A
j a
o T
s i o y i o m J o
T o q u i n N
s a t i o y o e y J O
J o q u U I n N
p a i s o a u t
e y d e D
( # T s w
o r e )
» p o p p
e o n j e A
w e a k & S t H
Q C 6 I x
N p a d 4 a u U u o
d y a T

=== PDF_PAGE 89 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon « 69
million, or 2.5 per cent of total industrial value*t (see Table 5).
The ratio of new industrial investment to additional Gross National
Product between 1950 and 1957 was 2.5, compared with 10.7 in
real estate and buildings.** Based on the predicted growth trends in
the three sectors, one projection, which seems optimistic in light of
recent trends, foresees an increase of about 20,000 new jobs every
five years. By 1980, therefore, there might be 60,000 new jobs in
industry, or about 4,000 a year, if that rate can be maintained.
Whether or not this projection will prove accurate depends partly on
the development of sufficiently attractive local and foreign markets
for Lebanese goods: processed food, furnishings, textiles, cement,
aluminum, and light manufactures. The increase in new jobs also
depends on whether or not the level of imports will remain stable.
We have already noted that imports cut very deeply into the rel-
atively rich Greater Beirut market. Here is a political issue that has
been with the Lebanese since independence: To what extent should
- foreign trade be regulated to encourage domestic manufacture and
employment? Assuming that industry can continue to open up some
4,000 jobs a year, the over-all employment picture is still dark.
By 1980 agriculture will have lost between 40,000 and 50,000 jobs,
and industry will have picked up 60,000 jobs, which means (cal-
culating from the 1960 figures of 220,000 agricultural jobs and
90,000 industrial jobs) that these two sectors will supply some
330,000 jobs for an active population of between 870,000 and
915,000. Can the service sector make up the difference?
The best educated guess is that it cannot. Although the service
sector is elastic and buoyant with the remarkable tourism develop-
ment and although it permits the Lebanese to exercise their full
resourcefulness, it cannot be expected to provide more than 127,000
new jobs by 1980 if its development continues at the same pace as
in the early 1960s. Even if the pace were to remain constant, this
good performance would not prevent considerable unemployment.
The Arab-Israeli war of June 1967, which drastically cut into
Lebanon’s tourist-transit trade to the holy places, showed how
vulnerable the service sector is to the chronic turbulence of the
Middle East and cast doubts on whether or not the earlier growth
rate could be maintained, much less increased.
If these trends in the creation of new jobs are reasonably cor-
rect, the only way to avoid widespread unemployment and its con-
sequences is to advance the whole rate of economic growth and to
give new investment more socially useful functions. Lebanon 1s

=== PDF_PAGE 90 ===
70 * STRESSES
getting richer, but investment in the private sector has not helped
sufficiently to spread the prosperity. The public sector has been left
this task by default.
The achievement of higher standards of living has imposed strains
as well as gains. The economic gains make Lebanon the envy of its
neighbors and help ameliorate the problems raised by the demo-
graphic trends discussed earlier. If prosperity in general seems to
lubricate the frictions of a growing and highly fragmented society,
however, the uneven distribution of its benefits aggravates tensions
as well. Uneven distribution among regions, classes, and sectors
raises a host of problems that challenge the toughest political insti-
tutions. Regional disparities in living standards weaken national
unity, impose great burdens on both the developed and the unde-
veloped areas, and promote dissatisfaction with the functioning of
the Lebanese political system at many levels. Disparities in income
distribution by class, though not as great as in many underdeveloped
countries, are highly visible in Lebanon. The overdevelopment of
the finance, commerce, and service sectors is made at the expense of
the agricultural and industrial sectors, thus making Lebanon vulner-
able to numerous economic and political stresses.
EXPOSURE TO MODERNITY
It may seem out of place to speak of “exposure to modernity” in
a book about Lebanon. The very name connotes cosmopolitanism,
sophistication, and the meeting of world cultures. To analyze re-
cent political adaptation to modernity it is not necessary to pinpoint
the beginnings of Lebanese contacts with the outside world because
the attempt would involve a recitation of the whole history of the
Lebanon.*® Lebanon’s exposure to the modern world, that is, the
world of industrial revolution, begins with its occupation by Muham-
mad Ali in the years 1831—1840.*" In the 1830s American Protestant
and French Jesuit missionaries and educators established schools
and printing presses to initiate what George Antonius has called
the “Arab awakening,” the effects of which are still being felt.** The
French influence has been very great, supported by France’s historic
“special relationship” with Levantine Catholics; in fact, the Uni-
versité de St. Joseph, established in 1875, has exerted the dominant
educational influence among Lebanon’s ruling elite, Christian and
non-Christian. Lebanon’s other great center of higher learning, the

=== PDF_PAGE 91 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 71
American University of Beirut, founded in 1866, has diffused liberal
ideas not only in Lebanon but also throughout the Arab world.
Furthermore, in the nineteenth century it was common for the
wealthy to educate their children abroad. The Muslims sent their
sons to Constantinople, where they absorbed the culture of an ad-
vanced, cosmopolitan city. The Catholics educated their sons in the
“universities of Italy and France. Finally, the letters and visits of
Lebanese who had emigrated to North and South America were of
great importance in exposing the people of Lebanon to Western
ways. To the Lebanese upper classes, therefore, exposure to the
techniques and culture of the West is nothing new.
The lower classes had to wait until World War II for their ex-
posure to the modern world. During the French Mandate, there was
some selective exposure. The Mandate authorities encouraged pri-
vate religious schools, which discriminated in favor of the Christians,
and built roads. These policies placed some additional Lebanese in
contact with modernity, but in general they were not the poorer ones.
World War II, however, brought the British and with them a vast
inflow of money. The tales of spectacular profiteering and the Horatio
Alger stories of the time are part of the folklore of modern Lebanon.
From the peasant who found a job as chauffeur with the British 7th
Army to the homme d'affaires who made a fortune selling tank
barricades, nearly everybody benefited. The boom has never really
ended. Twenty years after the expulsion of the Vichy regime, the
inhabitant of Beirut, rich or poor, can hardly avoid the ultramodern
world around him. Deafened by the jet airliners landing at the
nearby international airport and by the horns of 35,000 new auto-
mobiles in a chronic traffic jam, he may retreat several evenings a
week to the movies and for 35 cents view the latest American,
Egyptian, English, French, Indian, Italian, and Russian films. He
can also stay home and watch television: American Westerns and
crime programs on one of the local, privately owned channels or
the television offerings from Cairo.
In order to appreciate the magnitude of exposure in the postwar
period it is helpful to observe a few quantitative indicators. They may
be subdivided into three categories: internal communications, mass
communications, and education.
Even such a crude indicator as domestic mail per capita*® reveals
the rapidity of the transformation in internal communications: In
1948 there were 2.8 letters per capita; in 1963 the figure had
risen to 8.5, an increase of about 207 per cent. Foreign mail (sent

=== PDF_PAGE 92 ===
72 *° STRESSES
and received) per capita increased 195 per cent during the same
period. There were 23.6 telephones per 1,000 people in 1955 and
47.3 per 1,000 in 1963. During the Chehab regime (1958-1964),
the number of telephones more than doubled. If we look at auto-
mobiles as an indicator of internal communications, we see that in
1948 there were some 8,100 passenger vehicles in Lebanon or
about 6.7 per 1,000 people; in 1963 the number was up to 73,300,
or 36.4 automobiles per 1,000.
The growth of exposure to modernity through mass communica-
tions has been even more impressive. The average Lebanese citizen
is probably as aware of national and international affairs as his
counterpart in the United States, because the mass media are so
readily available. The radio carries a variety of messages beyond the
Greater Beirut area, and the dial covers a full spectrum of sources:
Cairo, Amman, Jerusalem, Moscow, Washington, London, Peking,
and Damascus. The Beirut radio network broadcasts locally in
Arabic and French and to a lesser extent in English and Armenian.
Whatever his physical immobility, the most provincial Biga_vil-
lager is exposed to points of view not easily available even to read-
ers of The New York Times. There is little doubt that Lebanon has
been virtually saturated with radios since the advent of the transis-
tor. A sample survey by the Association Libanaise des Sciences
Politiques (A.L.S.P.) in 1963 put the number of radios at 500,000.
Assuming four listeners per set, the population has been theoretically
blanketed. Fifteen years earlier there were perhaps one-tenth as
many radios.” The A.L.S.P. suggests that radios are ubiquitous in
all regions and among all socioeconomic groups. South Lebanon
has slightly fewer radios than do the other provinces, but even
there more than three-fourths of the people have access to radio;
farmers fall behind other occupational groups, but a good two-
thirds are nevertheless exposed. Most people prefer music and
news to other types of programs, and two-thirds of the sample
(mostly white-collar employees, university graduates, and mer-
chants) reported that they listen to foreign stations to obtain dif-
ferent points of view.”' It is certain that the proportion of “non-
listeners” described by Lerner in his study of modernization in the
Middle East has greatly dwindled since 1951 and with it the pro-
portion of “non-empathetic Traditionals” has also declined.*?
Lebanon is sometimes called “a nation of journalists.” Certainly
the Lebanese have been the journalists of the Arab world and have
established presses wherever there was a colony of Lebanese emi-

=== PDF_PAGE 93 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon +» 73
grants. The first paper in Arabic to appear in any Arab territory
was founded by Khalil al-Khoury at Beirut in 1858. In 1911
Lebanon’s first press association was founded, headed by Khalil
Sarkis, and the Lebanese Press Syndicate obtained governmental
sanction in 1921. Despite Ottoman and French restrictions, around
256 newspapers and 141 magazines had been founded by, 1927;
although most of them were short-lived. After World War II the
press continued to develop although the state continued to interfere.
One need only look at the statistics of recent years (see Table 6)
TABLE 6
NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS BY LANGUAGE, 1962
Weeklies Weeklies Periodicals
Dailies (nonpolitical) (political) (once or twice monthly)
Arabic 43 Arabic 88 Arabic 44 Arabic 80
~ French 4 French 10 French 2. French 6
English Ds Armenian 5 English 1 English 1
Armenian 4 ao Armenian 2 Armenian 12
Total 53 Total 103 Total 49 Total 99
Grand Total 304
Lebanese Press Syndicate, List of Registered Publications. Beirut: 1962.
to agree that Lebanon is a journalistically overdeveloped country.
In the United States thoughtful citizens worry about the disap-
pearance of the daily newspaper; in 1965 a Lebanese journalist
(who writes for at least four publications herself) remarked that
the country has too many daily newspapers. It is all very well to
have a diversity of points of view, she argued, but how can cohesive
public opinion exist without some common agreement on what is
important and what is true?
In 1950, there were forty-five dailies and an estimated circula-
tion of 80 copies per 1,000 people, and, by 1957, the circulation
was 100 copies per 1,000 people.** By 1963, according to the
A.L.S.P., general circulation was around 200,000, or 120 copies
per 1,000.°° “Eighty-five per cent of the Beirutis and 77 per cent
of the Lebanese in general read the papers frequently,” the A.L.S.P.
reported.®® Per capita consumption of newsprint has risen from 0.9
kilograms in 1951 to 3.9 kilograms in 1964.”
A word should be said about the movies and Lebanon’s newest

=== PDF_PAGE 94 ===
74 * STRESSES
mass medium, television. Both media are heavily concentrated in
the Greater Beirut area, perhaps even more than are the other
components of “exposure.” In the absence of a survey of Lebanese
film-going habits, one must rely on impressions and some rough
statistics to judge the impact of the cinema. Impressions suggest
strongly that Beirut may be the movie-going capital of the world.
Many people, especially in the middle-income groups, attend twice
or more a week, lured by the convenience, the wide choice of films,
the comfortable surroundings, and the very low price. The success of
the movies in Lebanon is amply borne out by the impressive increase
in both the number of theaters and in their seating capacity. Ac-
cording to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), Lebanese per capita film attendance in
1951 was 5; in 1962 it was 22.5, the second highest in the world.”
The number of movie theaters has increased from 48 to 170.
Lebanese parents and social critics worry about the possible effects
of this sort of exposure. Although there is no indication that movie
going has significantly weakened the family or increased juvenile
delinquency, it has contributed to a certain alienation among col-
lege youth and younger Lebanese in general.*® The. growth of tele-
vision, although it is much more recent, seems to be equally rapid.
In 1959 there were just over 6,000 television sets in the country
and, if we may assume five viewers per set, an audience of some
30,000. Four years later, the number of television sets had risen to
about 100,000, which suggests that perhaps 25 per cent of the
population is exposed to the programing that Beirut’s two private
companies and Cairo television offer.° The greatest bulk of the
sets is found in the Greater Beirut area, and the most avid specta-
tors are young: It has been estimated that 80 per cent of the per-
sons under twenty who have access to a set watch television every
night, whereas somewhat less than one-fourth of the adult popula-
tion does so. The same study suggests three findings about the
effects of television on family life. First, businessmen, white-collar
employees, and bureaucrats are the groups most frequently ex-
periencing a “change in habits” (except in South Lebanon); second,
the population of the province of Mount Lebanon, which has a
high living standard and proximity to the television transmitters,
has the highest proportion of viewers who find that television is
changing their habits; and, third, Beirut, in contrast, has the lowest
proportion of viewers in this category, reflecting—the study ob-
serves—the many distractions available to the Beiruti.*

=== PDF_PAGE 95 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon « 75
Education as a form of exposure to modernity has particular po-
litical relevance because it crucially affects the extent and sub-
stance of political participation. Certainly this is true in Lebanon,
and the high educational level in Mount Lebanon and Beirut un-
doubtedly contributes to the sophistication evident in the political
behavior of the middle- and upper-income groups. Equally im-
‘portant, however, is the uneven distribution of educational oppor-
tunity. The educationally deprived areas—rural and urban—have
long been controlled by political bosses. As the people in these
areas become more educated, and, as the number of educated
people in general grows, the stresses on traditional political ar-
rangements are increasing. Because education is a means of politi-
cization in Lebanon both its expansion and its substance deserve
examination.
The literacy level is one basic indicator of education spread.
Lebanon has a degree of literacy equal to those in politically mod-
- ernized countries like Italy, Cuba, Yugoslavia, and the Philippines.
Officials in the Ministry of National Education estimate that in
1965 more than 80 per cent of the entire population could read,
write, and figure. This figure may be compared with UNESCO’s
estimate of between 45 and 50 per cent literate in 1950. About
60 per cent of the literate population has command of two lan-
guages; about 25 per cent has command of three. The level of
literacy alone, however, is misleading for political analysis. In the
first place, illiteracy is significantly higher in rural Lebanon than in
the core area; illiteracy accentuates the historic divisions in the
political culture. One study, based on a survey of twenty-one vil-
lages, found an adult illiteracy level of 38 per cent in 1957. An-
other states that nearly half the adults over twenty years of age
living in the rural areas have had only two or three years of ele-
mentary education, and their literacy is consequently weak.** Mount
Lebanon, with its history of missionary education, is thought to have
the highest literacy level in the five provinces; it is followed at some
distance by North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and the Biqa. For
Beirut, estimates vary between about 70 and 90 per cent literacy.
Bilingual literacy, too, is concentrated in the Beirut-Mount Leb-
anon area: The formative influences of French, as a vehicle of West-
ern culture, are decidedly weaker in the rural zones. The core area
thus contrasts sharply with rural Lebanon on the basis of one of the
key variables in modernization. This imbalance, however, should not
obscure a trend of long-run political significance: The deprived area

=== PDF_PAGE 96 ===
76 * STRESSES
is now making the transition to general literacy that the core area
began to experience a century ago.
Because the literacy level also varies sharply according to re-
ligion, it further emphasizes historical divisions. The village study
mentioned previously reports that Christians are more generally
literate than are Muslims, primarily because Christians predomi-
nate in private schools and the government schools are weak (see
Table 7). Table 7 shows the decline in illiteracy among the youth
TABLE 7
RURAL ILLITERACY RATES
PERCENTAGE OF ILLITERACY
Men Women Boys Girls
Christians 23 45 22 Zo
Muslims 39 69 28 33
Selim Abou, Le Bilinguisme Arabe-Frangais au Liban (Paris: Presses Uni-
versitaires de France, 1962), p. 111.
and the attendant lessening of differences in illiteracy among the
sects as well as between the sexes. The political effects of these
trends are only beginning to be felt; in the next generation they
may transform the character of Lebanese politics.
Let us look at primary and secondary education in detail. In
the school year 1944-1945, there were 150,362 elementary and
secondary students in public and private schools; in 1963-1964,
the number of students was 371,239, an increase of 147 per cent.
During the same period, the school-age population increased by
only 85 per cent. The percentage of the school-age population ac-
tually attending school in 1944-1945 was thus 35.1 whereas nine-
teen years later it was 46.9 per cent.® The rate of expansion has
increased markedly since 1959. In the fourteen years between 1945
and 1959 the percentage of school-age population in school in-
creased by only 4.6 percentage points, from 35.1 per cent to 39.7
per cent. In the next five years, however, the percentage increased
7.2 percentage points. Both educational levels and progress under
the Mandate were much less impressive. In 1932, for example,
there were about 100,000 primary- and secondary-school students
out of a school-age population of approximately 317,000, a per-
centage of 31.7.° By 1943 the number of students had increased

=== PDF_PAGE 97 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon +* 77
approximately 30 per cent, and the school-age population had in-
creased 32 per cent, a feeble performance compared with the
postindependence developments.
The educational explosion affects all levels. In 1950, the num-
ber of Lebanese in primary school was 115 per 1,000 inhabitants
of the country; in 1963 the proportion had risen to 160 per 1,000.
‘There were twenty secondary-school students per 1,000 population
in 1950 and thirty-one per 1,000 in 1963; and the number of
university students increased from 6,822 in 1959 to 15,978 in
F653."
These figures show that the demand for education, traditionally
high among the Lebanese, has resulted in an ever-increasing pro-
portion of educated people. The literacy statistics bear this conclu-
sion out: Whereas 39 per cent of Lebanese aged sixty-one or above
are literate, 74 per cent of the 21-30 age group and 84 per cent
of the 6—20 age group are literate.* The demand for education has
- strained both public and private resources and has put a very high
price on private education in the middle 1960s. Increasing the
number of educated men and women also implies finding jobs for
them once they have received their certificates.
It would be misleading to assume that the educational boom has
affected all parts of Lebanon equally. The IRFED mission estimated
that, in 1959, the percentage of students to province population was
18.8 per cent in Beirut and 17.4 per cent in Mount Lebanon,
whereas North Lebanon registered only 16.3 per cent, the Biqa
13.5 per cent, and South Lebanon 13.2 per cent. All three out-
lying provinces fell below the national average of 16.4 per cent.
The disparity is heightened by the fact that Mount Lebanon and
Beirut are served primarily by private schools, which are con-
sidered to be of higher quality than the government schools, whereas
the rural districts, especially South Lebanon and the Biqa, must
rely heavily on the government for the relatively little education
available. On still another indicator of social mobilization, Mount
Lebanon and Beirut are ahead of the districts added by France in
2920.
We may conclude this discussion of exposure trends by calling
attention to their speed and their unevenness. Increasing exposure
to modernity is enlarging the politically conscious population. The
Lebanese political system, in the past a field of action for only a
small part of the population, faces the task of integrating a newly
politicized population. The unevenness of exposure in general makes

=== PDF_PAGE 98 ===
78 * STRESSES
such integration a formidable task. Radio, which carries many
kinds of political messages, reaches virtually all areas of Lebanon.
Education, which is intended to foster Lebanese citizenship, does
not. The concentration of internal communications in the Beirut—
Mount Lebanon area divides that region from its neighboring
provinces and accentuates historical separateness.
SUMMARY
A brief recapitulation of the trends in Lebanon’s social mobilization
may be helpful at this point. Table 8 provides an idea of the mag-
nitude and rapidity of these changes.
TABLE 8
SUMMARY OF SOCIAL-MOBILIZATION —,TRENDS
Year Data Year Data
Demographic trends
Population (millions) 1943 1.02 1963 2.00
Persons per sq. km. 1943 101 1963 193
Percentage of persons
in cities of 20,000
and over 1943 2857 1963 37.4
Economic trends
Energy consumption per
capita (kgs. of metric
tons of coal equivalent) 1960 520 1964 689
Electricity (millions of
kw. hours produced ) 1959 267 1962 551
Per capita income 1959 $362 1963 $449
Number of banks 1951 Ss) 1966 53
Exposure trends
Telephones per 1,000 1948 10.8 1963 47.3
Passenger vehicles per
1,000 1948 6.7 1963 36.4
Number of radio listeners
(in thousands) 1948 200 1963 2,000
Newsprint consumption per
capita (kgs.) 1951 0.9 1964 3.9
Primary school students
per 1,000 1950 tis 1963 160
Secondary school students
per 1,000 1950 20 1963 31
University students per
1,000 1950 2.4 1963 8.2

=== PDF_PAGE 99 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 79
The demographic movements, insofar as they are creating an ur-
ban proletariat, are no doubt establishing a base for future in-
dustrialization, but they are also accelerating the growth of Greater
Beirut and increasing its burden of social, administrative, and po-
litical problems. Meanwhile, talented manpower leaves the outly-
ing areas for the cities at the same time that rural needs and ex-
pectations increase. Economic development is occurring, but its
unevenness may be offsetting its politically soothing effects with
increased tension and division. Greater exposure to modernity may
be promoting tolerance, cooperation, and a civic spirit among some
people, but among the well-educated this increased exposure adds
to discontent and unemployment. Exposure produces mass sophis-
TABLE 9
SocIAL MOBILIZATION BY REGION
Mount North South
Indicator Beirut Lebanon Lebanon Lebanon Biqa
Persons per square
kilometer 23,034 340 191 137 47
IRFED development
scores mae 1.70 75 1,92
Per capita income,
1957 + $803 $205 $200 $151 $206
Percentage of radio
owners 85 85 85 78 91
Percentage of television
owners 39 35 on 28 18
Newspaper consumption
(percentage of total
circulation) 10 * 30 §
Percentage of readers
interested in internal
politics ** 68 63 53 45 49
Percentage of students
in population 18.8 17.4 16.3 13.5 EM
* Figure is for Beirut and Mount Lebanon combined. ae
+ United States, Operations Missions in Lebanon, Economic Data for the Ekistic
Programme of Lebanon (Beirut: Doxiadis, 1957), pp. 23-7.
§ Figure is for North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and Bigqa combined. 4
#% Association Libanaise des Sciences Politiques, 3eme Congrés de Science Politique,
Presse, Radio, Télévision et Opinion Publique (Beirut: May 1963), p. 13 (mimeo).

=== PDF_PAGE 100 ===
80 * STRESSES
tication, and in Lebanon, for better or worse, this sophistication
presents an implicit challenge to the substantive and procedural
aspects of Lebanese politics. The unevenness in Lebanese social
mobilization is summarized in Table 9.
Finally, it is useful to ask how Lebanon compares with other
Arab states on certain indices of social mobilization. Table 10
TABLE 10
COMPARISON OF SOCIAL MOBILIZATION IN LEBANON
AND FIVE ARAB STATES
Saudi
Indicator Lebanon Syria Jordan Iraq U.A.R. Arabia
Population, annual
rate of increase
(1964) 2.6 SpA Sia Ee | 21 et
Persons per square
kilometer (1963-1964) 193 28 21 16°- 8124 3
Percentage of population
in cities 100,000 and
over (1952-1958) ENSE e ep AS EE, 8.1 14.35 222 Fay
Energy consumption per
capita (1964) 689 351 261 666 321 320
Daily calories
(1957-1962) 2,550 2,330 2,050 Nae 2,690 n.a.
Inhabitants per
physician (1960) 1,100 4,600 5,800 5,600 2,600 13,000
Gross national product
per capita (1957) $362 $173) = S109) = S156mn pia $170
Newspaper circulation
per 1,000 (1965) 120 21 11 12 tS 3
Primary school students
per 1,000 (1959) 93 85 102 80 2 12
* Density to cultivated land.
t Percentage in cities larger than 20,000.
Statistical Yearbook: 1965 (New York: United Nations, 1966); and Demo-
graphic Yearbook: 1960 (New York: United Nations, 1960). G.N.P. data are from
Bruce M. Russett et al., World Handbook of Political and Social Indicators (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1964). Education data are from Middle East Forum,
36, No. 6 (1961), 11. Figures for Lebanon are corrected where necessary.
shows that Lebanon is substantially ahead of some of its neighbors.
This kind of unevenness is also important. If the Arab world ‘is
considered as a unit—and it is by a great many Arabs—Lebanon’s

=== PDF_PAGE 101 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 81
share of the area’s modernization resources is disproportionately
large. In an underdeveloped area Lebanon is a highly developed
enclave. Lebanon is, however, bound to the other Arab states by
cultural, economic, and political ties, and as a part of the Arab
world it is obliged to justify and defend its relative attainments.
Inevitably these attainments stimulate envy, bitterness, and political
tension between Lebanon and its neighbors, especially Syria. This
tension places still another load on the Lebanese system.

=== PDF_PAGE 102 ===
82 * STRESSES
NOTES
1 The following works are relevant to the present chapter. Daniel Lerner,
The Passing of Traditional Society (New York: Free Press, 1958); Leonard
Binder, Iran (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961); Gabriel Al-
mond and James Coleman, The Politics of Developing Areas (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1960); and Manfred Halpern, The Politics of
Social Change in the Near East and North Africa (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1963).
2Karl W. Deutsch, “Social Mobilization and Political Development,”
American Political Science Review, 55, No. 3 (1961), 493-4.
*Tbid., ps 201.
4 This discussion relies heavily on information from the Lebanese Ministry
of Planning.
5 Kingsley Davis, “Population Analysis,” in The Republic of Lebanon
(New Haven: Human Relations Area Files, 1956), pp. 54-80.
6 David Yaukey, Fertility Differences in a Modernizing Country (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1961), pp. 79, 81.
7 The figures are from the Ministry of Planning. The total figure for 1932
is 793,000. But 37,000 of those counted had emigrated between 1924 and
1932, although they had opted for Lebanese citizenship under the terms of
the Lausanne agreement. The total figure for 1943 is 1,060,000, but it in-
cludes 38,000 foreigners. The increase rate is calculated from the reduced
figures for each year, but the density figure for 1943 is based upon total
resident population, Lebanese and non-Lebanese, as are subsequent density
figures.
8U.S. Operations Mission in Lebanon, Economic Data for the Ekistic
Programme of Lebanon (Beirut: Doxiadis, 1957), hereafter cited as Ekistic
Survey.
® Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités de
Développement du Liban, 1 (Beirut: 1960-1961), 46. This report is the
work of the Institut International de Recherches et de Formation en vue de
Développement and is cited hereafter as TRFED Report.
10 'Yaukey, op. cit., p. 77, shows that Lebanon fits the European pattern
of demographic transition; the total fertility rate of educated city dwellers
is lowest, the fertility of uneducated city dwellers is higher, and the fertility
of uneducated village dwellers is highest. For the near future, “among Chris-
tians one would expect (1) a further decrease in the already small socio-
economic fertility differences in the city and, accordingly, (2) an increase
in the difference between uneducated city dwellers and uneducated isolated
villagers. Among the Muslims, one would expect (1) a continued decrease
in the fertility of both educated and uneducated city dwellers and, accord-
ingly, (2) an increase in the fertility differences between uneducated city
dwellers and uneducated isolated villagers, then finally (3) a decrease in the
socio-economic fertility differences in the city. In the more distant future,
one might expect the villages as well to start the transition to the limited
family model. But what to expect ultimately of city fertility is not suggested

=== PDF_PAGE 103 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 83
by demographic transition theory. After all city classes have brought fertility
under voluntary control, then fertility will reflect the choices of the partners
at the time, just as it does at present in urban United States.” Yaukey,
op. cit., pp. 82-3.
11]7RFED Report, I, 49.
™ United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees, Ac-
tivities in Lebanon (Beirut: United Nations, Apnil 1; 1961p pl
18 Republic of Lebanon, Nutrition Survey: A Report by the Inter-depart-
mental Committee on Nutrition for National Defense (Beirut: 1961), pp:
1-16. The specialists from the Lebanese government and the U.S. Depart-
ment of Defense who prepared this report judged the average caloric intake
of 2,300 “adequate.”
™ Between 1951 and 1961 the budget of the Ministry of Public Health
increased by 152 per cent, or from L£3.5 (approximately $1.16) to
L£6.4 (approximately $2.15) per capita for Lebanese citizens. IRFED Re-
port, I, 339.
1 Figures submitted by the Lebanese government to the United Nations
for 1965 reported a total population estimate of 2,280,000 and a density
of 219 per square kilometer—a sharp upward revision of earlier estimates.
~ United Nations, Statistical Yearbook: 1965 (New York: United Nations,
1966).
16 Davis, op. cit., p. 70.
17 Said Chéhabe ed-Dine, Géographie Humaine de Beyrouth (Beirut: Cal-
fat, 1960).
18 John Gulick, “Old Values and New Institutions in a Lebanese City,”
Human Organization, 24 (Spring 1965), 50.
19 Figures are from the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor.
20 Calculated from Ministry of Planning information and figures given in
the IRFED Report.
21 ]RFED, Le Liban Face & son Développement: Etudes et Documents (Bei-
rut: IRFED, 1963), Appendix R.
22 Ekistic Survey, tables on migration to Beirut. North Lebanon’s lack
of mobility is probably exaggerated, because migration to Tripoli was not
examined in this study.
23 Charles W. Churchill, “Village Life in the Central Beqa Valley of Leba-
non,” Middle East Economic Papers: 1959 (Beirut: American University
Economic Research Institute, 1959), p. 7. Churchill concluded, “If anything,
the youngest generation is less mobile than its elders.”
24 Saba G. Shiber, “A Critical Glance at Greater Beirut,” in Shiber (ed.),
Urban Form and Aesthetics (Kuwait, 1961), pp. 88-9 (mimeo.).
25 Gulick has commented on this apparent coexistence of new and old
ways in his studies of a small Lebanese village and a large town, Tripoli.
Discussing the latter, he writes, “So far, anthropological findings indicate
that urbanization per se does not necessarily destroy traditional cultures.”
Gulick, op. cit., p. 52. See also Gulick, Social Structure and Culture Change
in a Lebanese Village (New York: Wenner-Gren, 1955).
26 Nathan Glazer and Daniel P. Moynihan, Beyond the Melting Pot
(Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1963).

=== PDF_PAGE 104 ===
84 * STRESSES
27 The number of kilowatt hours produced in 1959 was 267 million; in
1962 it was 551 million. United Nations, Statistical Yearbook: 1964 (New
York: United Nations, 1965). Per capita consumption of energy (measured
in kilograms of metric tons of coal equivalent) was 520 in 1960 and 645
in 1963.
28 Ekistic Survey, p. 22. Doxiadis Associates used figures calculated by the
Economic Research Institute of the American University of Beirut.
29 Republic of Lebanon, Ministry of Finance, 1965.
30 Using the 1963 estimate of the Lebanese gross national product made
by the U.S. Department of Commerce and the population estimates made
by the Lebanese Ministry of Planning for the same year, the per capita in-
come of Lebanese citizens can be estimated at $449, whereas the per capita
income of inhabitants of Lebanon is estimated at $361. See International
Commerce, February 1, 1965, p. 8. It should be noted that the U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce estimate is conservative; another reputable American
source puts the gross national product at $770 million. The 1950 and 1956
per capita estimates are from Professor A. Y. Badre, “The National Income
of Lebanon,” Middle East Economic Papers: 1956 (Beirut: American Uni-
versity Economic Research Institute, 1956).
31 Le Commerce du Levant, March 5, 1966, p. 17.
82 Ekistic Survey, pp. 30-2.
33 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Mediterranean
Development Project, Lebanon: Country Report (Rome: United Nations,
1959), pp. 11-4.
34 TRFED Report, I, 57, 81. Agricultural workers make up 49 per cent
of the permanent active work force and 55 per cent of the permanent and
temporary work force. The IRFED investigators thought the Doxiadis ex-
perts had underestimated the percentage of workers in agriculture and in-
dustry. The disparities in income distribution reported by Doxiadis may
thus also have been understated. Preliminary Assessment of Magpower Re-
sources and Requirements in Lebanon (Beirut: American University of Bei-
rut Economic Research Institute, 1960).
35 IRFED Report, I, 87.
36 For a complete explanation of the methodology see IRFED Report, II,
19-50. For a clearer, if less detailed, exposition, see Le Liban Face a son
Développement, pp. 13-21.
37 TIRFED Report, I, 31-50.
38 IRFED, Le Liban Face a son Développement, p. 158.
39 Ibid., p. 166; IRFED Report, II, 92.
40 Marwan Iskandar, Social Security for Lebanon (Beirut: Dar al-tali‘ah,
1962),-p. 33:
41 They were the permanently employed; there are also some 130,000 sea-
sonal workers, mostly in agriculture. See IRFED Report, I, 57.
‘2 These calculations are based on the assumptions that by 1980 Lebanon
will have eliminated about 60 per cent of the foreign laborers (mainly
Syrians) who presently do menial and hard labor and that these jobs will
be filled by Lebanese. Otherwise, 38 per cent of the Lebanese active work
force would be unemployed by 1980.

=== PDF_PAGE 105 ===
Social Mobilization in Lebanon + 85
8 Even assuming that irrigated land will double from 111,195 acres in
1965 to 222,390 acres in 1980 and that the remaining cultivatable land
(580,685 acres) is exploited for dry farming—this total is the maximum
cultivation possible—the agricultural sector will still support only 140,000
workers in 1980, assuming that technology allows only one man per approxi-
mately 2.5 acres of irrigated land and one man per 12.3 acres of dry farmland.
If that were the case, then the agricultural sector would actually lose 80,000 jobs
by 1980. The Lebanese experts do not believe this many jobs will actually
be lost because new developments in marine and forest agriculture will open
some new jobs.
44IRFED Report, Il, 380, 378. Industry’s share of new investment in
1950 was 13.5 per cent; in 1961 it was 12.2 per cent. Le Commerce du
Levant, March 5, 1966.
45 IRFED Report, Il, 389.
46 See Philip K. Hitti, Lebanon in History: From Earliest Times to the
Present (New York: Macmillan, 1957).
47 How the rationalistic policies of that strangely modern ruler were im-
posed upon the Lebanon’s particularistic culture has been discussed in Wil-
liam R. Polk, The Opening of South Lebanon, 1788-1840 (Cambridge,
_ Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1963).
48 George Antonius, The Arab Awakening (London: Hamilton, 1938),
chaps. 3, 5; and Kamal Salibi, The Modern History of Lebanon (London:
Weidenfeld, 1965), pp. 120-48.
49 All figures for internal communications are drawn from United Nations,
Statistical Yearbook: 1960 (New York: United Nations, 1961); and United
Nations, Statistical Yearbook: 1964.
50 Association Libanaise des Sciences Politiques, Presse, Radio, Télévision,
et Opinion Publique (Beirut: May 1963), p. 26 (mimeo.), hereafter cited
as A.L.S.P. Study.
51 Jbid., pp. 29, 30. These findings are consistent with those of a survey
made in 1950-1951 for the United States government, which attributed the
apparent effectiveness of the B.B.C. in part to the credibility of its news
programs and the strong emphasis on good music in its programing. This
survey suggested that the Voice of America would be more effective if it
would strengthen its signal, free its news reporting from obvious propa-
ganda, and present more local news and Arabic music. Bureau of Applied
Social Research (B.A.S.R.), The Radio Audience of Lebanon (New York:
1951) (multigraph).
52 Lerner, op. cit., pp. 174-204, reanalyzed the 1951 B.A.S.R. data and
showed that Lebanon even in 1951 was “not ridden by traditionalist fears
that public awareness of internal social problems must inevitably undermine
the entire structure of authority” but did face formidable problems related
to sectarian fears, economic progress, and Arab nationalism.
53 Conversations with Lebanese Press Syndicate sources.
54 United Nations, Statistical Yearbook: 1960.
55 4.L.8.P. Study, p. 6. Cf. Selim Abou, Le Bilinguisme Arabe-Frangais au
Liban (Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1962), pp. 125-6. A figure reported in
United Nations, Statistical Yearbook: 1961, gives Lebanon 153 daily newspaper

=== PDF_PAGE 106 ===
86 ° STRESSES
copies per 1,000 in 1960. The discrepancy probably results from using a smaller
population base (Lebanese citizens rather than inhabitants).
56 4.L.S.P. Study, p. 35.
57 United Nations Educational, Social and Cultural Organization, World
Communications: 1964 (Paris: UNESCO, 1965).
>8 Hong Kong ranked first. Ibid.
59 See, for example, two novels by young Lebanese writers, both girls, one
Druze and the other Shiite, one American educated and the other French edu-
cated, which both have alienation as their theme. Rima Alamuddin, Spring to
Summer (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1963); Leila Baalbaki, And ahya [I Live] (Beirut:
Dar majalat al-shi‘r, 1963). A number of lectures and magazine articles have
dealt with the problems of Lebanese youth. See, for example, “Crise de Jeunesse
Libanaise,” Cénacle Libanais (Beirut), 1958.
60 Figures are from A.L.S.P. Study, pp. 17 ff.; and from United Nations,
Statistical Yearbook: 1964.
61 4.L.S.P. Study, pp. 19-20.
62 UNESCO, Basic Facts and Figures: 1960 (Paris: UNESCO, 1961).
63 Abou, op. cit., p. 92. This estimate is based on a survey of 7,908 inhabi-
tants of twenty-one villages. It must be noted that seventeen of the twenty-one
villages are located within old Mount Lebanon, and thus the figures probably
understate the extent of rural illiteracy by underrepresenting the areas outside
historic Western influence.
64 T’Orient, September 22, 1966.
‘5 If the base population is restricted to Lebanese citizens, as opposed to
inhabitants, the percentage of the school-age group attending school in 1963—
1964 was 48.4. Figures for 1944-1945 are drawn from Mohammed Majzoub,
Le Liban et Orient Arabe, 1943-1965 (unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Aix-en-Provence, 1956), p. 50. The school-age population esti-
mate is drawn from the 1944 population distribution by age calculated by J.
Gholl, L’Evolution Démographique Libanaise, Travaux du Semaine d’Etudes
Economiques et Financiéres, No. 1 (Beirut: 1957-1958), and the 1959 distribu-
tion was calculated by the IRFED mission. See IRFED Report, I, 48. The
1963-1964 enrollment figures are from the Ministry of National Education.
66 R. D. Matthews and Matta Akrawi, Education in the Arab Countries of
the Near East (Washington, D.C.: American Council on Education, 1949),
p. 422.
67 The 1950 figures are taken from data presented at a UNESCO Conference
on Education in Beirut, February 1960. Middle East Forum, 36 (June 1960),
11. The 1959 and 1963 data come from the Ministry of Education. Secondary-
school students are those who have the certificat and are aiming for either
the brevet or baccalauréat degrees.
®887RFED Report, I, 63; United Nations, Statistical Yearbook: 1965.
69 Abou, op. cit., p. 96.
70 IRFED Report, I, 65.
