=== PDF_PAGE 107 ===
CHAPTER «3
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma
The Lebanese Republic faces a continuing dilemma because it is
confronted with problems of national integration and social mobili-
' zation. Integration requires the maintenance of an intricate balance
among competing interests, parochial and foreign. Social mobiliza-
tion imposes additional burdens on the entire political system: new
power groups, new policy demands, new administrative loads.
These two conditions are mutually reinforcing, and thus their po-
litically dysfunctional effects are amplified. Parochialism is an ob-
stacle to the even spread of social mobilization, and social mobiliza-
tion magnifies rather than obliterates the divisions in the political
culture. A political dilemma is the result: The institutional means
for coping with a fragmented political culture are antagonistic to
the development of a system strong enough to handle the multiple
challenges posed by social mobilization. Lebanon currently man-
ages its complex identity difficulties through the institutionalization
of traditional pluralism.
Chapter 2 has suggested that the mechanisms involved in the
Lebanese solution are as fragile as they are sophisticated. In Leb-
anon, a modicum of security from historic divisions has been bought
at the expense of political modernization. Balance takes precedence
over the institutional flexibility and dynamism that a society in
rapid transition requires for security, social justice, and national
development. The Lebanese political apparatus is ill equipped to
carry out tasks of regulation, adjudication, and development, and
these tasks are beyond the capacity of even the most resourceful
individuals and special interests. It is not a complete exaggeration
to state that the basic structures and functions in this system are
87

=== PDF_PAGE 108 ===
88 * STRESSES
mismatched: The executive branch is more important for the
representation it gives to parochial elements through the sectarian
allocation of administrative posts than for its policy-making ac-
tivities, whereas the legislature is more effective in promoting special
interests through its influence over routine administration than in
representing the public interest.
Lebanese politics in the postwar era is essentially a struggle with
this dilemma. Efforts to concentrate more power in the presidency
are challenged and corrupted by the parochial leaders, who fear
that their influence over it could thereby decline, but the resulting
tendency to immobilisme is consistently and repeatedly challenged
by the chronic administrative crises and the demands of the newly
politicized for power and policies attuned to contemporary needs
and values. A decade of revolution in the Arab world and the
deeper scars of the 1958 crisis (fears of what it might have be-
come, for example) have made confessional and class tensions
more apparent in the middle 1960s than they were during the
Khoury regime. The overdevelopment of the Greater Beirut area
has cast a shadow over the lesser progress made in the outer re-
gions. Political ferment in the eastern Arab world, which shows
no signs of abating, shakes the entire Lebanese political system.
Population increase and urban migration are more rapid than the
expansion of the industrial and agricultural sectors. As the pres-
sures for jobs mount, the economic situation of the resident Pales-
tinians and Syrians becomes increasingly precarious. The perceived
accuracy of the established sectarian proportions dwindles with
time, eroded by the faster population increase among non-Chris-
tians. Furthermore, the ordinary people in Lebanon are more po-
litically critical, more knowledgeable, more and more politically
active in the middle 1960s than they were two decades earlier. This
growing sector of potential power aggravates the problem of in-
stitutionalizing mass participation. Modes of conflict resolution
that were adequate for a thin stratum of notables in the early post-
independence era are no longer appropriate. There is a pressing
need to institutionalize political participation by the growing un-
traditional, skilled strata, which are deprived of power yet im-
patient to exercise it, and by the increasingly politicized common
people.
This chapter discusses some of the more serious manifestations
of the dilemma of reconciling social mobilization and national in-
tegration and attempts to show where the political system is par-

=== PDF_PAGE 109 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 89
ticularly vulnerable. It examines, first, the political loads imposed
by the historic integration problem and some of the political re-
sponses. Second, it analyzes some of the political consequences of
social mobilization. Finally, it analyzes Lebanon’s two major crises,
in which the gravity of the dilemma is most clearly evident.
THE STRAIN OF INTEGRATION
Although traditional pluralism has contributed to the liberal and
democratic aspects of Lebanese politics, it also remains the greatest
threat to the political system. The veneer of integration, founded
on convenience rather than conviction, is constantly challenged by
friction caused by sectarian suspicions and external pressures.
Sectarian Suspicions
It seems unlikely that sectarian suspicions can be eliminated in the
foreseeable future both because they are rooted firmly in the tradi-
tional culture of Lebanon—dating at least from the double qga’im-
maqamiyyah—and because uneven social mobilization and economic
development have sharpened rather than blunted them. The rele-
vant questions for the short and middle run, therefore, are whether
or not the system will be able to cope with the tensions that will
inevitably produce a certain amount of open strife and whether or
not there are any realistic options for improving its ability to cope
with them.
During the Mandate the major political concern was antagonism
between Christians and non-Christians. This antagonism proved
both useful and inconvenient to the French, useful in that it facili-
tated their policy of divide and rule but inconvenient because of
resulting Muslim resentment. After independence, during the Presi-
dency of Bechara al-Khoury, Lebanon enjoyed relatively peaceful
sectarian relations, but there was a recrudescence of tension in
1953 and 1954. In March 1953, for example, the Hay’at al-
Watania, an organization of Sunnite notables, led a movement to
gain a greater share of administrative appointments for Sunnites. An
Islamic congress convened to press more radical demands. Although
it was repudiated by some of the prominent Sunnite and Shiite
notables, it alarmed the Christian leaders, who issued a declaration
that they would never accept physical modification of the country.
The crisis abated when the Kataeb (mostly Maronite) called an

=== PDF_PAGE 110 ===
90 * STRESSES
interconfessional congress and the Nida al-Qawmi group (mostly
Sunnite) appealed for an end to sectarian rivalry.’ In July and
August of the following year a more serious incident occurred. A
pamphlet that spoke irreverently of Islam appeared under the name
of a former student, Georges Chakar, following the publication of
an anti-Maronite pamphlet called “Muslim Lebanon Today.” Sec-
tarian feeling was so sensitive that a protest strike took place, fol-
lowed the next day by violent demonstrations in which fifty-five
people were hurt. Although Chakar was in jail at the time and the
pamphlet had apparently been written in 1947, tensions did not
ease. President Camille Chamoun, in a national address, warned
that mixing religion and politics would mean the end of an in-
dependent Lebanon. Prominent Sunnites like Hussein Oueini at-
tempted to mediate the affair; and the Grand Mufti of Lebanon,
Shaykh Muhammad Alaya, called for unity. Finally order was re-
stored, and Chakar was sentenced forthwith.”
The insurrection of summer 1958, discussed at greater length
later in this chapter, disrupted political, social, and economic life
but did not degenerate into a confessional struggle until well after
a political settlement had been reached. At that point, however,
and for a full month afterward, there was a rash of incidents with
distinctly sectarian overtones. Although most of them may have
been matters of personal vengeance and isolated aggression, they
were sufficient to remind Christians and Muslims of their mutual
fears of persecution.*
Sectarianism remains a critical problem in the 1960s. In March
1965, West Germany gave Israel diplomatic recognition. High-
school and university students in many parts of Lebanon partici-
pated in the wave of demonstrations protesting this event. In
Tripoli a Christian private school was attacked and its superior in-
jured by a crowd of Sunnite youths, apparently because they believed
that the school authorities had forbidden the students to demon-
strate. The incident touched off protest rallies in Christian schools
and further violence, including a dynamite explosion. Sixty arrests
were made, several people were injured, and at least one was
killed.* A year later a teacher at the American University of Beirut
was hurriedly deported when an extremist Muslim newspaper
charged that some writings of St. Thomas Aquinas that were con-
sidered derogatory toward Islam had been distributed in a course.®
It is significant that such incidents involve newly politicized ele-
ments, especially students, and are not restricted to the older, pre-

=== PDF_PAGE 111 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 91
sumably more parochial, generation. These incidents are hardly
indicative of diminishing sectarian tensions. Indeed, many knowl-
edgeable Lebanese interviewed in the early 1960s felt that these
tensions were increasing.
In assessing Lebanon’s ability to cope with the sectarian prob-
lem, it is necessary to recall the argument about the sources of
sectarian feeling advanced in Chapter 1 and to analyze the system’s
defense mechanisms in terms of that framework. Chapter 1 sug-
gested that both doctrinaire Christians and doctrinaire Muslims
feel superior to and threatened by each other. Because the demo-
graphic proportions are so close neither side has an unchallengeable
claim to dominance; therefore, there are continuing pressures for
adjusting the distribution of power as manifested in administrative
appointments, the allocation of public-works funds, and ultimately
the National Pact itself. In earlier days sectarian suspicions were
kept down by a number of factors that have become less important
- with time. The physical separation of different communities pre-
viously permitted a sufficient degree of peaceful coexistence. In
modern Lebanon—in the mobilized Beirut and Tripoli areas, where
Christians and non-Christians rub shoulders—this separation is
much reduced. The spread of education and exposure to mass
media has created a stratum of people deeply involved in the
Lebanese identity crisis; they are educated enough to see the prob-
lem but not sophisticated enough to live with it easily. The old nota-
bles, when they ruled virtually unchallenged, were well equipped to
control sectarian problems through traditional channels; and the es-
tablishment was itself largely untroubled by sectarian disputes.
Since 1950, however, the newer strata have forced themselves upon
the political scene, and the role of the establishment has declined
relatively. Whereas most of the new groups profess secularism
there is not one that commands purely nonsectarian loyalty. Even
the army is vulnerable to sectarian paralysis at those moments of
crises in which national unity is so precious. As social mobilization
forces the state increasingly to intervene in ordinary life, it also
subjects it to growing sectarian strains.
The Republic is vulnerable to these strains but not entirely help-
less. It possesses several instruments for dealing with sectarian eXx-
plosions. Foremost among these are the procedures for institution-
alizing sectarianism itself. The most prominent architect of these
procedures was the banker, Michel Chiha. His analysis illustrates
the Lebanese talent for making virtues of necessities.

=== PDF_PAGE 112 ===
92 * STRESSES
Le confessionnalisme au Liban . . . est la garantie d’une représenta-
tion politique et sociale équitable pour des minorités confessionnelles
associées . . . [il] est avant tout un facteur d’ordre et de paix... .
Le Liban est fait de minorités confessionnelles associées. Ces minor-
ités se présentent sous I’étiquette confessionnelle parce que le Liban
a toujours été le refuge de la liberté de conscience. Cela a été possible
4 cause de la situation géographique du Liban, pays de montagne ou
il a toujours été possible de se défendre, et pays maritime d’ou il a
toujours été facile de prendre la mer. . . . Malgré beaucoup d’erreurs
et d’abus, c’est le confessionnalisme qui a enseigné au Liban la tole-
rance. . . . L’équilibre libanais 4 base confessionnelle n’est pas un
équilibre arbitraire. Ce n’est nullement le préjugé qui I’a fait; c’est la
necessité de reconnaitre des particularités qui vont aussi loin que
celles des partis politiques entre eux. Avec le temps, ces différences
peuvent s’atténuer et lentement disparaitre. Actuellement, la raison
d’étre du Liban est justement dans l’équilibre confessionnel qui le
caractérise et qui se manifeste d’abord sur le plan du Pouvoir légis-
latif.°
Chiha’s analysis, written in 1954, is sophisticated, but the turbulent
events since then cast doubt on the efficacy of his remedy for
sectarianism and on the likelihood of an early disappearance of
sectarian feeling. The major notables of all sects who mediate
potential confessional disputes through traditional means are just
as important as are the formal arrangements. Sectarian crises are
still settled largely through the intervention of the traditional nota-
bles, each of whom can calm excited feelings by personal access to
his clientele. As long as the old notables as a group exercise
dominant control and continue to act in a united manner to check
sectarian explosions, Lebanon weathers the storms. New mecha-
nisms may soon be necessary, however, because increasing political
participation is eroding the power and effectiveness of the old
notables.
The government also uses its police power to prevent the spread
of writings that might stir up sectarian feelings. The law contains
severe penalties for those who engage in activities of this sort:
Censorship can be heavy, and hardly a month goes by without an
official announcement that a certain pamphlet or book has been
suppressed. Since 1958, the internal security and military forces
have kept a sharp vigil against such threats, but this vigilance has
not reduced appreciably the number of breaches that actually occur.
On the contrary, the Beirut and Tripoli areas nurture political-

=== PDF_PAGE 113 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 93
protest movements of all kinds, including highly fanatic sectarian
groups like the Muslim Brotherhood and the Islamic Liberation
Party and antireligious groupings like the Syrian National Party
(known generally by its French name, Parti Populaire Syrien, or
PLP 254)5
Finally, the government can enact policies of “social justice”
that have at least the potential for reducing the inequities that pro-
mote sectarian strife. The Lebanese state has only recently begun
to explore the possibility of redistributive measures to reduce the
imbalances that history and the social-mobilization process have
produced. Among Christians and Muslims the question of social
justice is inextricably bound up with the question of relative po-
litical power. If it were simply a matter of raising the economic
level of an oppressed minority, the state might act directly to im-
prove the condition of the deprived group. Christians and non-
Christians, however, exist in nearly equal proportions, and, al-
though most Muslims seem to be poorer than most Christians,
each religious group has its indigent and its wealthy. The state lacks
the resources, the skills, and the will to equalize the various com-
munities. Even if it could accomplish this formidable task, it is
still not clear that sectarian tensions would be substantially reduced.
The issue among the sects is not exclusively economic or social.
Clashes also occur over differences in belief, and the sects are pro-
foundly concerned about the possibility that their rivals may gain
political power at their expense. This does not mean, however, that
social and economic policy is irrelevant to sectarian conflict. Well-
reasoned policy can be instrumental in showing the state’s impartial-
ity among the sects. Many Muslims think that Christians exploit the
state at the expense of non-Christians, and many Christians be-
lieve that the Muslims are encroaching on Christian prerogatives in
the hope of seizing complete power. In recent years the state has
made a number of gestures to strengthen its reputation of sectarian
neutrality and to show that all sects have a share in political rule.
Few Lebanese, however, think that the state has reached an ac-
ceptable degree of impartiality, and some feel that the state ought
to be “more than equal” in benefiting the needy.
External Pressures
Lebanon is bordered on the west by the Mediterranean and the
fleets of the United States and the Soviet Union, in the south by
its enemy, Israel, and in the north and east by Syria—a jealous

=== PDF_PAGE 114 ===
94 * STRESSES
brother. It is committed to friendship with the United Arab Re-
public (Egypt), the most powerful Arab state, and with the Chris-
tian powers of the West, especially the United States and France.
Maintaining a balance among these more powerful entities presents
chronic and delicate problems for the Lebanese. The necessity for
equilibrium has been discussed in Chapter 1; in this section, we
shall show Lebanon’s difficulties in preserving this equilibrium in
the turmoil of Arab and world politics since independence.
If Lebanon’s external relations were merely a matter of diplo-
macy, there would be no unusual problems, but they are much
more, for all the Republic’s interested neighbors exert substantial
influence in the domestic political process. Lebanon is not the only
state whose internal and external situations are closely interwoven,
but it is one of the few in which many of the most powerful actors
in domestic politics live outside its borders. The boundaries of the
Lebanese political system are as porous as the boundaries of its
territory.
Each of the interested foreign states has cultivated certain Leb-
anese leaders and communities with sentimental, educational, re-
ligious, or simply monetary inducements. The precariousness of
Lebanese institutional arrangements promotes such special foreign
relationships. Shiites who fear Gamal Abdel Nasser or Syrian
socialism find it difficult not to accept Saudi Arabian money or
propaganda. To a pious Maronite or a graduate of the Jesuit uni-
versity, Lebanon’s “special relationship” with France is not an
empty phrase. A British subsidy is a legitimate and necessary
weapon for the editor who fears Lebanon is falling under Soviet-
Egyptian control. The United States has been known to bestow
substantial favors on anticommunist leaders. Arab nationalists rely
heavily upon Cairo for sustenance. In Lebanon foreign embassies
are frequently the functional equivalent and substitute for political
parties, financing parliamentary candidates, pressuring policy mak-
ers, and influencing public opinion through the press.
Outside powers use various inducements to further their in-
terests inside Lebanon, but they also use formidable sanctions to
alter the domestic balance. If the American 6th Fleet is not in the
immediate vicinity, it can be called quickly; its massive presence
during its semiannual calls at Beirut is a visible reminder of
American power. To some Lebanese it is a symbol of outside pro-
tection; to many others it represents the threat of neoimperialism.

=== PDF_PAGE 115 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 95
Foreign powers also exert compelling leverage through their finan-
cial and trade policies. Neighboring Arab states account for about
two-thirds of Lebanon’s exports and two-thirds of its capital in-
flow. It is very easy for a Syrian regime to punish Lebanon by
closing the frontiers or impeding truck traffic. Iraq and the U.A.R.
occasionally bar Lebanese fruits or threaten Lebanese business in-
terests in their countries.
The collapse of Beirut’s Intra Bank in 1966 illustrates Lebanese
vulnerability. When a tight money market and the enmity of rival
banking factions inside Lebanon threatened to undermine Intra’s
overextended position, a number of external interests that the
Lebanese normally neutralize through the intricate balancing pro-
cess suddenly saw an opportunity for advancement. The United
Arab Republic and its wealthy clients within Lebanon supposedly
saw a chance to weaken a bank that finances important newspapers
hostile to Egypt. According to another report, the British were
irked when Middle East Airlines, in which Intra Bank held a con-
trolling interest, chose to buy American rather than British airliners;
they therefore persuaded Kuwaiti investors to transfer their siza-
ble accounts from Intra to British banks. French and Soviet in-
terests, which had common antipathy for the pro-American man-
agement of the Bank, undermined Intra holdings in Paris. Then the
Saudi Arabians seized the occasion to embarrass a Lebanese govern-
ment that they perceived as more sympathetic to President Abdel
Nasser than to King Faisal. The withdrawal of the big Saudi
Arabian oil accounts precipitated a run on the bank.’ In the resolu-
tion of the Intra crisis a year later, Lebanon characteristically was
dependent upon foreign assistance—the good offices of the United
States government and American financiers. With an economy so
heavily weighted toward services, financial and otherwise, Lebanon
finds itself extremely vulnerable to foreign manipulation and to
external crises.
Foreign interests also intervene in local affairs through propa-
ganda. Chapter 2 showed that nearly all Lebanese are exposed to
the radio. Those with a predisposition toward pan-Arabism in one
form or another are particularly receptive to the voices of Cairo
and Damascus. When President Nasser speaks on a hot July eve-
ning, thousands of radios in Beirut carry his voice; should he have
critical words for a Lebanese politician or government, there will
be immediate repercussions. During the crises of the 1950s the

=== PDF_PAGE 116 ===
96 * STRESSES
radio was used to incite disorder and rebellion, and it was all the
more effective because of the volatile and unorganized condition of
mass political opinion in Lebanon.
Fated by its strategic location to be the object of many con-
flicting foreign influences, the Republic of Lebanon finds itself
buffeted by Great Power and Arab-world politics. Indeed, as Chap-
ter 1 suggested, independence itself was partially the result of long-
standing rivalries in the Middle East between Great Britain and
France. The Franco-British rivalry continued to affect the country’s
factional political process throughout the regime of Bechara al-
Khoury (1943-1952). Britain, which had made every effort in
1943 to ensure that the French protégé, Emile Edde, would not
be given the Presidency, exerted a similar though more discreet in-
fluence to hasten the downfall of Bechara al-Khoury nine years
later. Khoury, although he had benefited from the British presence
in 1943, was resolutely opposed to the plans of the British client,
King Abdallah, in Jordan to establish under his aegis a unified
state in the Fertile Crescent; and he had thrown his weight with the
Egyptian—Saudi Arabian faction in Arab-world politics. Camille
Chamoun, a friend of the British, the Hashemites, and the Turks
succeeded Khoury as President. As the American-Soviet rivalry
developed in earnest, Chamoun and his chief ministers also became
useful to the United States. Chamoun’s regime ended in chaos
partly because he made too many commitments to the West and
thus lost control of the Lebanese whose loyalties were directed
toward, and by, the United Arab Republic. Although the Americans
cSMAC
IE (os ta
| Mes GF sc
2 ek (@ et> 5
x
QW
NOgL .

=== PDF_PAGE 117 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 97
were instrumental in persuading General Fuad Chehab to take the
Presidency in 1958, Chehab’s rule facilitated a resurgence of
French influence. The Soviet Union, although it is at a disadvan-
tage owing to the sizable American presence during the 1950s,
nevertheless labors resolutely and with increasing success to assert
itself, using the instrumentalities of the Orthodox Church, the
Communist Party, finance and business operations, and cultural
programs. Since World War II Lebanese stability has been in-
creasingly endangered by the rivalry between the American and
Soviet superpowers. The very preponderance of American influence
during the 1950s contributed to the strain, because it gave credi-
bility to the accusations of the Left that Lebanon was an American
puppet. In light of the widely heralded “thaw” in the Cold War in
the early 1960s, it seems paradoxical that this rivalry exerts even
greater strains in Lebanon than it did previously. Whatever rap-
prochements may have been reached between the United States and
the Soviet Union in other domains, the Great Power struggle in the
Middle East reached a new intensity as a consequence of the Arab-
Israeli war of June 1967. The Soviet Union crowned its years of
piecemeal erosion of the Western position with a spectacular dip-
lomatic and political victory, by supporting the Arab states, “con-
servative’ and “radical” alike. Under these circumstances the
American presence has made Lebanon’s already delicate position
in the Arab world even more awkward than before.
When the Arab world shows signs of political unity, Lebanese
policy makers fear that there will be a concerted effort to deprive
FIGURE 2. Foreign Policy. Left to
Right: King Faisal of Saudi
Arabia, the Lebanese Foreign
Minister, President Nasser of the
United Arab Republic, President
Charles Helou of Lebanon.

=== PDF_PAGE 118 ===
98 * STRESSES
Lebanon of its autonomy and its liberal economic system. Yet,
when there is discord among the Arab states, competing factions
pressure Lebanon to choose sides. The rise of pan-Arabism, which
followed the Egyptian-Soviet arms agreement and culminated
in the Egyptian-Syrian union, set in motion forces within Leb-
anon that nearly reduced the state to its pre-1920 boundaries:
There was little doubt of the strong affinity of Lebanese Sunnites
for Arab unity in a physical sense. Several years later, however,
when the drive for unity had become less intense, Lebanon’s posi-
tion was scarcely more enviable. The division of the Arab world
into a “progressive,” socialist, and pro-Soviet faction and a “con-
servative,” free-enterprise, and pro-Western faction found the Leb-
anese government torn between the powerful advocates of each
faction, just as during the period before the Suez crisis it had been
torn by the Egyptian-Iraqi rivalry. In both cases Lebanese Catho-
lics suspected Lebanese Muslims of harboring radical and subver-
sive ambitions, and the Sunnites regarded the Christians as puppets
of the United States and England and enemies of the struggle for
Arab independence.
In addition to its embroilment in Great Power and Arab-world
rivalries, Lebanon has troubles with two neighbors, Israel and
Syria. Lebanon and Israel have been in a technical state of war
since 1948, and their common frontier is officially closed. Although
this border is Israel’s most peaceful one, that fact should not obscure
the dangers in the situation for Lebanon. Indeed, the lack of con-
flict along this border raises the suspicion among Arabs, both in-
side and outside Lebanon, that the state is not sincere in its op-
position to Israel. Israelis themselves like to imagine that Lebanon
is secretly benevolent toward them. The Lebanese people, however,
both Muslim and Christian, believe Israel is an illegitimate state
and fear its power. Beirut may well have prospered from trade
and transportation routes that have been diverted from Palestine,
but the South of Lebanon is blighted economically by the sealed
border. Thousands of embittered Palestinian refugees wait to return
to their homes and have no particular affection for their host gov-
ernment. Every flare-up in the Arab-Israeli conflict strains the
Lebanese political processes because it draws attention to Lebanon’s
relative military weakness. When Israel diverted Jordan River
waters, for example, Syria proposed that Lebanon permit Syrian
troops inside its territory to protect the Arab counterdiversion
installations. Lebanon’s reluctance to consent was embarrassing

=== PDF_PAGE 119 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 99
because it indicated that some Lebanese thought there was more
to fear from Syria than from Israel. When Palestinian commandos
were using Lebanese territory as a base for raids into Israel in the
early 1960s, the government faced another dilemma: To suppress
the commandos meant incurring the anger of Arabs inside and
outside Lebanon who believed that raids were morally and pollit-
ically justified; not to suppress them invited Israeli retaliation.
Lebanon experienced an acute domestic crisis during the Arab-
Israeli war of 1967 as the result of its prudent failure to join the
hostilities. The army’s commander, General Emile Bustani, a
Maronite Christian, refused to commit his small force to a cause
that he believed would certainly be lost and instead positioned
sizable detachments around Beirut and Tripoli to control the demon-
strations and riots protesting his decision not to aid Syria, Jordan,
and the U.A.R. In addition, General Bustani’s decision put him
directly at odds with Prime Minister Rashid Karami, a Sunnite
Muslim from Tripoli, who insisted that the army fight Israel. This
confrontation, like those between Lebanon’s civilian and military
leadership in the 1952 and 1958 crises, resulted in the military’s
temporary seizure of power and a new erosion of confidence in the
capability of Lebanon’s political institutions. Although Israel’s
ferocious and successful blitzkrieg of Lebanon’s more powerful
sister states mitigated short-run discontent with the army’s nonbel-
ligerence, it appears to have. aggravated Lebanon’s problem of
maintaining a domestically acceptable balance in its relationships
with the other Arab states and with the Great Powers. Furthermore,
it revealed Lebanon’s utter vulnerability. Taunted by the Israelis
during the war for military impotence and threatened afterward by
ominous Israeli comment about the Litani River (which rises and
flows in Lebanon but which is at one point only about three miles
from the Israeli border), the Lebanese were divided over the proper
course to follow and began to question the efficacy of their political
institutions and policies. Ought Lebanon to continue to seek security
through weakness, by offering no threat to Israel and relying upon
American or United Nations protection in case Israel should en-
croach anyway? Israeli and American behavior in the 1967 war
cast doubts upon the wisdom of this stance, and many Lebanese
considered such a policy dishonorable as well. On the other hand,
a more active policy of self-defense and cooperation with the other
Arab states incurred the risk of alienating American support, court-
ing Soviet influence, with possibly dangerous consequences, pro-

=== PDF_PAGE 120 ===
100 * STRESSES
viding the Israelis with a pretext for aggression, and inviting the
interference of other Arab states like socialist Syria in Lebanon’s
sovereign affairs.
Lebanese relations with Syria are also a chronic foreign-policy
worry. The barriers between Syria and Lebanon are relatively
recent. Syrian Arabs still resent the manner in which France par-
celed out Syrian territory to create Greater Lebanon in 1920. Again
Lebanese parochialism shows its paradoxical affinity for suprana-
tional loyalties: Many families have members on both sides of the
ill-defined border. These patterns of supranational loyalty were
sharply revealed during Lebanon’s 1958 crisis when the insurgents
made full use of their Syrian relationships to control virtually all the
border territories. Sunnites in Tripoli were well supplied by their
Syrian kin, and Syrian Druzes furnished their Lebanese cousins with
the necessary arms by moving freely across the frontiers. Even in
normal times, however, there is a basic conflict between Syria and
Lebanon: Their economic systems clash. When independence was
achieved, Lebanese notables decided that their state should pursue
policies to promote free trade and to develop the service sector.
Syrian politicians, notably Khaled al-Azm, resolved: that their state
should develop its industrial potential, a policy that required pro-
tectionist and autarchic measures. These basic differences in eco-
nomic orientation led to the termination of the customs union in
1950 and to subsequent periodic conflicts. As Lebanon’s major
trading partner, as its gateway to other Eastern markets, and as
its major supplier of wheat, Syria is too important to be ignored.
Yet, despite the obvious importance of Syria, there is no formal
diplomatic representation between the two states, for, in addition
to the reason of economic separatism, Syrian governments par-
adoxically have held that such representation would sanction the
“artificial” barriers between the two sister states. The problem of
Syrian-Lebanese relations is complicated by Syria’s political turmoil
and radical tendencies, which have steadily widened the ideological
gap between the two.
Although foreign intervention in Lebanese internal affairs has
serious implications for Lebanese independence and sovereignty,
the crucial and unique threat posed by the foreign situation is
that of internal disintegration. So intimately bound together are
domestic and foreign politics that a major factor in the choice of
a Lebanese prime minister is his current position in the context
of the regional situation. Lebanon has had only one major prime

=== PDF_PAGE 121 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 101
minister since 1954—Sami Sulh—who was not touted as a warm
friend of President Nasser; it is quite normal in a Lebanese govern-
ment crisis for potential prime ministerial candidates to pay osten-
tatious visits to Cairo. Such dependence on external sources of
Support generates suspicions in conservative Christian quarters.
Christian suspicion, however, is matched by Muslim displeasure
at the proximity of the United States fleet and the activities of
Western embassies. The essential foreign-policy problem is to keep
these suspicions in rough balance. Those aspects of the National
Pact that deal strictly with foreign relations remain the best pos-
sible means for keeping the balance, but they can deal only with
independent external conditions. Lebanon, small and weak, its
policy options limited by the necessity to maintain the delicate
internal balance, is virtually powerless to affect those conditions
substantially. As such, it is fated to remain forever a dependent
variable in the area’s international politics, with its only bargaining
power a credible threat to destroy itself.
Socioeconomic Tensions
If the probability of revolution, or serious unrest, is inversely
associated with the “continuous, unimpeded opportunity to satisfy
new needs, new hopes, new expectations,” * then it is possible in
a very crude manner to assess the politically relevant socioeconomic
tensions in contemporary Lebanon. First, however, it is necessary
to make some conservative assumptions about the growing politi-
cally conscious stratum of the Lebanese population, its expecta-
tions, and the extent to which these expectations are fulfilled in
modern Lebanon.
Who are the socially mobilized, politically conscious, potential
political activists in Lebanon today? Assuming a resident population
of 2 million in the early 1960s, it is possible to make some nu-
merical estimates of the politically relevant subpopulations. First,
we shall exclude all but the critical age group, that is, the 40 per
cent of the population between twelve and thirty-five, some 800,000
people. This move excludes at once most of the ruling establishment.
It also makes the exaggerated but convenient assumption that the
population over thirty-five is politically inert. We then subdivide
this stratum into the educated and uneducated. The education sta-
tistics report that some 385,000 of this group are currently enrolled
at some level of education—primary, secondary, or university.
We will exclude primary-school students, for the moment, and

=== PDF_PAGE 122 ===
102 * STRESSES
narrow the field to include the 60,000 secondary-school and 12,000
university students enrolled at a given time. These 72,000 are the
primary pool of persons who can be mobilized for political action:
They are literate, educated, exposed, and sophisticated. They are
concentrated in the Greater Beirut area. Every year, about 2,000
receive university diplomas. Approximately 10,000 receive second-
ary-school diplomas; of these latter about 4,000 may go on to the
university, and 6,000 will enter the labor force, leaving 8,000 sec-
ondary and university students who terminate their education every
year. Let us further assume that one-fourth of these 8,000 terminal-
degree receivers are women and will become politically inert after
graduation; that leaves around 6,000 male degree holders passing
into the “real world” every year. Assuming that they enter it, on the
average, at age twenty; that the trend is constant over time (when
actually it is increasing); and that they remain potential political
activists until they are thirty-five, then at any given time the polit-
ically critical educated population is around 90,000, a total of
6,000 activists added in each of fifteen years. Their expectations
include a desire for nonmanual jobs with some prestige and the
opportunity for advancement. They have idealistic and politically
utopian values. To what extent does Lebanon satisfy their expec-
tations? To what extent will it satisfy them in the future?
The politically critical group experiences considerable difficulty
in fitting reality to expectation in contemporary Lebanon. The
difficulty is immediately apparent for those who hold only a sec-
ondary-school degree or a B.A. degree in liberal arts—the lower
stratum of the politically critical group. They may work as clerks,
as salesmen, or as employees in banks and commercial establish-
ments. Jobs for them are scarce and the pay far too low to support
the desired style of life in the city. There is plenty of time to dream.
It is this subgroup that supplies the cadres of Lebanon’s more
radical political movements: the Arab Nationalist Movement
(A.N.M.), the Parti Populaire Syrien (P.P.S.), the Progressive So-
cialist Party (P.S.P.), the Baath Party, and the Communist Party.°
The young men with medical and engineering degrees fare some-
what better than the liberal-arts or secondary-school graduates, but
their professional fields are also crowded. There is obvious com-
petition among doctors in the Beirut area, even though the hinter-
lands are understaffed; and new engineers may have difficulty estab-
lishing themselves in Lebanon. For these groups emigration is a
feasible alternative, and Lebanon is losing increasing numbers of

=== PDF_PAGE 123 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 103
skilled personnel to the United States and the oil principalities. Doc-
tors, for example, are urged to specialize in hopes of filling new re-
search niches, only to find themselves excluded by other specialists
who finished sooner. The higher political and bureaucratic positions
are filled largely by men with law degrees from French universities; but
supply is beginning to outstrip the demand for these positions as well.
If the supply of secondary-school and university students were
to remain at its 1963-1964 level for the next fifteen years, then
the educated stratum might be absorbed in a rapidly expanding ser-
vices sector. According to the Ministry of Planning, some 130,000-
150,000 jobs could open up in that fifteen-year period for only
90,000 new educated men. Such a calculation, however, does not
take into account the considerable expansion of both the public and
private school systems, and the strong pressure from Lebanese
parents to expand them even more. In the five-year period 1959-
1960 to 1963-1964, the number of students in secondary school
_ alone increased by nearly 45 per cent. If subsequent five-year peri-
ods should show similar growth, then by 1972 the supply of ed-
ucated men would have already exceeded the quota of new jobs
through 1980. This calculation does not even assume an increase
in university graduates. Although projections of this sort are crude,
the image of job insufficiency is very clear, and the expectations of
a substantial section of the educated group may be disappointed.
The educated face the prospect. of either emigrating or settling for
menial service jobs, for which there will be additional competition
from unskilled, or manual, workers. The competition for the service
jobs, therefore, may be even more intense than for the prestige
occupations.
The sector of the population between twelve and thirty-five that
is not in secondary schools or the university in the early 1960s
numbers around 638,000, of whom half (319,000) are male. Less
than half this group has been exposed to some primary ‘education,
but all of it has been exposed to radio programing. If the sex dis-
tribution within this age group is even, we may estimate that around
13,900 boys enter it every year, assuming for the sake of analysis
that the population-increase rate is zero. We may also assume that
these young men are poor and likely to remain so, and that they
are relatively more numerous in the “other Lebanon,” rural North
Lebanon, South Lebanon, and the Biqa. What are their expecta-
tions, and how are they politically relevant?
The primary concerns of this “uneducated” group are making

=== PDF_PAGE 124 ===
104 * STRESSES
a living and raising a family. In the middle 1960s, their unskilled
and semiskilled labor is absorbed by the agricultural sector (ap-
proximately 220,000 work in agriculture) and the industrial sector
(where about 87,000 work). There is also an indeterminate number
engaged in minor services.° In all likelihood, it will become in-
creasingly difficult for the men in this sector to realize their simple
ambitions, given the present pattern of economic development in
Lebanon. The basic reasons for this unhappy prognosis have been
discussed in Chapter 2. According to the Lebanese Planning Min-
istry, the number of jobs in the agricultural sector will shrink con-
siderably, despite the development of new lands, whereas the rate
of job creation in the industrial sector will be insufficient to sup-
port a growing unskilled labor force. Despite sharp job expansion
in the period after the 1958 crisis, the trend in Lebanese industrial
development in recent years does not augur a bright future for
this sector.
In the postcrisis recovery period (1958-1963) under President
Fuad Chehab, the number of jobs tripled, but it will be necessary
to quadruple the number of jobs by 1980 in order to absorb the
predicted potential industrial work force.’ The industrial sector thus
ought to increase to 275,000 jobs. Government officials predict,
however, that, under the best of circumstances, there will be only
150,000 industrial jobs by 1980. One out of every three workers
may be unemployed by that time, and a heavy proportion of them
will be in the politically critical age group. For workers in this
category emigration is only a remote possibility. Even if Syria
should greatly expand its industrial capacity by that time, the
60,000 or more Syrian laborers currently employed in Lebanon
presumably will fill the new openings there. Furthermore, as future
Lebanese regimes pursue development policies the prospect of in-
flation will arise. This will weigh heavily on the poor, because
the economic pressure for higher prices is likely to exceed the
pressure for higher wages and because new capital investment
continues to be heavily directed into areas of meager social useful-
ness. The grimness of this projection will doubtless be offset to
some extent through traditional channels, as it is today: Families
will continue to look out for their own; there will always be room
for another tiny grocery or an extra pair of hands; expanding tour-
ism may provide some new openings for the unskilled. The tradi-
tional solutions, however, cannot begin to satisfy the expectations
of the expanding sector of the young and unskilled, and there is

=== PDF_PAGE 125 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma +* 105
every indication that the problem will become more serious in
the future.
Two CRISES
Lebanon’s political dilemma is the product of environmental
adversity generated by parochial tendencies, foreign activities,
and social mobilization. Behind the facade of stability and the
ritual maneuvers of the cliques is the constant possibility that
matters will get out of hand. Twice during the first two decades
of independence matters have in fact gotten out of hand. The over-
loaded current, in Trotsky’s analogy, burned out the safety switches.
An examination of the crises of 1952 and 1958 will permit an
intuitive judgment as to the seriousness of Lebanon’s dilemma.
The 1952 Crisis
According to the Lebanese Constitution, the President is to be
elected by at least a two-thirds vote of a popularly elected Parlia-
ment to an unrenewable term of six years..* In 1947 Lebanon
had its first opportunity to try out these procedures without the
overt interference of Western diplomatic missions. Many believed
that the 1947 parliamentary elections had been rigged by the
Khoury regime, and these suspicions were reinforced a year later
when the President used his clear parliamentary majority to suspend
the nonrenewal clause in his particular case in order to present
himself for re-election. Khoury’s re-election was denounced by many
notables, some because their ambitions had been damaged and
others because they were concerned about the harm done to the
country’s institutions.'* The Constitution had been easily circum-
vented by the ruling clique. The opposition had not been given a
fair opportunity to compete with the Khoury machine. The devices
for institutionalizing opposition had failed. This institutional failure
dealt a blow to hopes that Lebanon would develop workable dem-
ocratic processes. It persuaded the notables opposing Khoury that
they would have to apply extraordinary pressures in order to break
his power. By exploiting the well-founded stories of administrative
corruption, the opposition notables, who had never succeeded in
banding together successfully, began to mobilize a mass following.
In 1949 the Committee of National Liberation was created." The
opposition grew until by 1952 it included Kamal Jumblat's new

=== PDF_PAGE 126 ===
106 * STRESSES
Progressive Socialist Party, important regional notables and pres-
idential aspirants, newspaper editors, the remnants of the Parti
Populaire Syrien, the National Bloc, the Najjadeh (the Sunnite
youth group), the Ghassanides (the Greek Orthodox youth organi-
zation, later disbanded), the Hay’at al-Watania (the organization
of Sunnite notables), and the Kataeb (the Maronite youth organi-
zation).
By spring and summer of 1952 the domestic situation had de-
teriorated. There were controversies over nationalizing the elec-
tricity company and changing the personal-status legislation. The
cost of living index in Beirut was up eight points over 1950, and
the wholesale price index had risen twenty-one points.” According
to Prime Minister Sami Sulh there were about 50,000 unemployed.”
These unfavorable background conditions set the stage for Khoury’s
fall. The leaders of the Socialist National Front (S.N.F.) that had
been elected from Mount Lebanon in the 1951 elections staged
a series of demonstrations, rallies, and strikes.” They culminated
in a huge rally on August 27 at the town of Deir al-Qamar in the
Chouf, an area in which Camille Chamoun and Kamal Jumblat
were traditionally strong.1* The opposition’s success in mobilizing
the people contrasted with the Khoury machine’s inability to keep
control. Well suited for playing caucus politics with the notables, it
was ill equipped to rally popular support in any organized manner.
Its weakness was compounded by the loss of the popular Riad Sulh,
who had supplied its strongest link to the Sunnite masses. Shutting
down opposition newspapers only strengthened the regime’s en-
emies."” Reports of scandals in the Beirut municipality and the
Ministry of National Economy, a purge of the gendarmes, a boycott
of electricity tax payments followed by power shutdowns, strikes by
newspapers and taxi drivers all added to the snowballing movement.
A belated effort by the regime to launch a major reform program
failed to cool down the crisis. Then, early in September, Prime
Minister Sami Sulh’s cabinet began to disintegrate, and the Prime
Minister, who was at odds with a faction within Khoury’s following,
administered the coup de grdce by delivering in Parliament an
emotional but highly explicit indictment of the regime’s corruption.
He then dramatically left the Chamber.” Successive efforts by
President Khoury to form a cabinet between September 9 and
September 18 failed; the notables, particularly the Sunnites, would
not cooperate. The fact that Khoury still held a strong parliamentary
majority meant little. The significant political struggle had moved

=== PDF_PAGE 127 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 107
outside the Chamber of Deputies. Meanwhile, the screws were being
tightened by the opposition, which had called an effective general
strike. It might seem strange that at this critical juncture, the
President did not call upon the army to preserve order. It seems,
however, that General Fuad Chehab, the Commander, was unwill-
ing to interfere in politics.2! On September 17, President Khoury
had several conversations with General Chehab concerning the
attitudes of the opposition and the state of public safety during the
strike. The General reported that he was apprehensive about the
situation, that he expected trouble, and that the army would act
to preserve peace only if all else failed. At this moment the President
suddenly could see “a bloody movie” with many Lebanese dead.
He handed General Chehab two decrees, one of which appointed
Chehab Prime Minister. After a fruitless attempt to designate a
civilian prime minister from among the Sunnite notables and thus
to restore the normal situation, Khoury told General Chehab that
he was leaving the Presidency to avoid bloodshed. The enigmatic
General replied, “You might think, Your Excellency, that I have not
performed my duty completely in such a situation; I am sorry for the
result.” *» General Chehab served as acting head of state and head
of government until Parliament elected a new President, Camille
Chamoun, on September 24.
The 1952 crisis shows that the Lebanese system, although it was
adequate for routine politics, was unequal to a basic dilemma of
power: It had failed to provide strong leadership and it had failed
to. institutionalize a responsible opposition. This incapacity was
visible on three levels. First, the parliamentary and the presidential
electoral processes lacked legitimacy because formal channels were
obstructed by clique politics. Second, the executive apparatus could
not cope with the demands for vigorous, effective policies to deal
with mounting national problems. Corruption and inefficiency flour-
ished, and legitimacy was further eroded. Third, both the regime
and the opposition failed to manage the popular forces that were
drawn into the struggle. The regime had neglected to develop
organized popular support and was outmaneuvered by the erratic
activities of a motley opposition. The opposition was able to mo-
bilize crowds and call a strike, but it could not organize the people
for persistent rational activity. Kamal Jumblat later wrote that the
Socialist National Front had never intended to overthrow the regime
but only to reform it. Lacking an organized party mechanism, the
S.N.F. was unable to control the forces it had unleashed.”

=== PDF_PAGE 128 ===
108 * STRESSES
Although the process of executive succession failed its first test
in the 1948-1952 period, this failure was quickly repaired with a
minimum of damage, but the causes of the failure remained. Six
years later the crisis was far more serious, because the external and
internal strains had increased.
The 1958 Crisis
A crisis that erupts into civil war and leaves 2,000 to 4,000 casu-
alties does not indicate great strength in a political system.** Such
an eruption does, however, imply that the forces converging on the
system are both strong and collectively dysfunctional.” In 1958,
one of the major stresses was the uncertainty arising from President
Chamoun’s refusal to promise publicly that he would not induce
Parliament to amend the Constitution and re-elect him for another
term. His attempts to reduce the influence of several important rural
bosses clearly conveyed the impression that he would try to do what
his predecessor had done a decade earlier. The opposition had been de-
manding that he remove the succession issue from politics since
March 1957, but at the end of that year the President’s determina-
tion to retain freedom of decision was evident in the following state-
ment:
J'ai mes raisons. Je ferai connaitre mon point de vue en temps op-
portun. Ce sera en mai, juin ou juillet. . . . Je comprends trés bien
les soucis que peut vous inspirer l’éventualité d'une révision de la
Constitution. Je suis moi-méme a principe, contre la révision. Ce-
pendant, il est un point sur lequel je ne veux laisser subsister aucune
ambiguité: si, au moment voulu, je ne suis pas assuré de trouver un
successeur qui assure la continuité de ma politique, je le déclare
d’ores et déja, je reconsiderai ma position.”°
During winter and spring of 1958—a period that Fahim Qubain has
aptly designated as the “slide into anarchy’—the crisis developed
a momentum of its own and the original dispute receded in im-
portance. Indeed, the most disorderly and bloody events took place
after President Chamoun, in June 1958, finally made it clear that
he would not seek renewal of his term.?7
President Chamoun entered office a popular figure—attractive,
intelligent, friendly to Christians and non-Christians alike. His popu-
larity, however, was not enough to prevent other leaders from
maneuvering him into a minority position. Lacking a firm institu-
tional base and the political finesse demanded of Lebanese poli-

=== PDF_PAGE 129 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 109
ticians, he was especially vulnerable to pressures. Yet even with
these resources, President Chamoun would have been lucky to avoid
the crisis. He had the misfortune to rule during a difficult period.
Sectarian feelings were high. Arab regional politics were in turmoil.
The American-Soviet rivalry was acute. New political elements were
emerging, challenging traditional political values. The issues involved
in the crisis were not easily susceptible to compromise. Of the many
issues involved three stand out as the most troublesome: foreign
orientation, socioeconomic-group alignments, and sectarian hos-
tility.
During the Suez crisis of 1956 President Chamoun’s lukewarm
support for Cairo aroused visible discontent among Lebanese
Sunnites and Arab nationalists at all levels. His foreign minister did
not hide an undiplomatic enthusiasm for things Western and ac-
cepted all too eagerly the helping hand of the American “Eisen-
hower Doctrine.” Such acceptance was sufficient evidence for the
Opposition that the neutrality provision of the National Pact had
been violated, and it eroded the little that remained of the regime’s
legitimacy. On the eve of the crisis a journalist of the moderate wing
of the opposition summarized the foreign factor as follows: “Un
nouveau crédo politique est proposé depuis huit mois, aux Libanais:
Si vous n’étes pas chamounien, c’est que vous étes un traitre et un
syro-bolchevik.” °° From the point of view of the regime, winning
the struggle over foreign orientation was a matter of political sur-
vival. Cairo radio, the Egyptian Embassy in Beirut, the pro-Nasser
Lebanese press, the radical groups, and the notables unfriendly to
Chamoun were working actively to liberate Lebanon from his regime.
Chamoun obviously did not consider his own overthrow a negotiable
issue, and, because the insurgents were assisted by Syria and Egypt,
he began to solicit further support from the West. Because both
sides solicited foreign help, the Lebanese crisis was internationalized.
Lebanese domestic politics was a function of the post-Suez ferment
in the Arab world, and Lebanon became an object of Cold War
rivalry. When proceedings before the League of Arab States failed
to reduce tensions, the United Nations Security Council debated a
Lebanese complaint against the United Arab Republic, and a
United Nations Observer Group was dispatched to look into the
case. There is no doubt whatever that anti-Western elements in the
Syrian region of the United Arab Republic assisted the insurgents
to a tangible degree, but the full significance of this participation re-
mains a matter of controversy.”

=== PDF_PAGE 130 ===
110 * STRESSES
The Lebanese crisis took a new turn on July 14, when a revolu-
tion destroyed the Hashemite monarchy in Iraq, seat of the Baghdad
Pact. It was a stunning blow for Western interests. Jubilant Arab
nationalists foresaw the imminent collapse of the pro-Western
regimes of Jordan and Lebanon as well and considered the revolu-
tion a giant step toward unity. Alarmed at the possibility of Soviet
gains in this turbulent situation, the West reacted in a historically
familiar manner. The next day 15,000 American troops landed on
Lebanese soil, supported by the 40,000 men and seventy ships of the
American 6th Fleet, and the British dropped paratroopers in
Jordan. Because of this substantial military commitment, President
Eisenhower’s special emissary, Robert Murphy, was able to give a
certain weight to the mediation of a group of Lebanese notables
calling themselves the Third Force. A compromise was arranged on
the basis of the formula “no victor—no vanquished,” and General
Chehab was prevailed upon to become the new President.
The breakdown of Lebanon’s internal balance prompted overt
interference by the United Arab Republic, the United States, and
the United Nations because the interests of all three were very much
involved in its internal affairs. The claims of Arab nationalism and
traditional relationships with Syrians made the U.A.R. and the
Lebanese insurgents parties to the struggle to rid the Arab world
of an alien regime. The Americans were cast in the historic role of
the West; they found themselves suddenly committed to protecting
the non-Muslim communities that had been too open in expressing
their affinity for the West. The Cold War perspective, however,
probably was a more compelling reason for United States military
participation. Because the Great Powers had once again been drawn
into intervention in Lebanon, the United Nations could not ignore
events there, for they threatened world peace.
The 1958 crisis illustrates Lebanon’s persistent problems of
parochialism and foreign entanglement. It also shows that the com-
plex effects of social mobilization make the stability of the formal
political structures more and more precarious. The progressive in-
tellectuals among the 1958 insurgents assert that the crisis was
rooted in class hostility and believe that the basic cleavage was be-
tween the poor, both urban and rural, and the upper bourgeoisie of
Beirut and Mount Lebanon. There is substance to this argument. A
glance at the map of areas held by loyalists and insurgents (see
Map 3) shows that the loyalists were defending the developed
area of Lebanon against the poor regions controlled by the in-

=== PDF_PAGE 131 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 111
surgents. An examination of the cost-of-living index at Beirut re-
veals that prior to the 1958 crisis there was an increase rate even
greater than the increase that preceded the 1952 crisis. From 1950
to 1951 the index rose by thirty-six points; from 1955 to 1957 it
Tose seventy-five points.*® The index is a crude but significant
measure of economic difficulties to which the poor are especially
vulnerable.
An examination of the forces on each side and their policy posi-
tions, however, suggests that the divisions were more complicated
than simple economic-class hostility. There were rich bankers and
landlords in the leadership of both the loyalists and the insurgents;
and relatively progressive elements confronted each other across the
barricades. Each side had an important measure of support from
both the urban and the rural poor, and the religious cleavage was
much more important at this level than among the middle and upper
classes. President Chamoun’s loyalist backing consisted of the more
_conservative notables of Christian Mount Lebanon, elements of the
business, commerce, and finance community that had benefited from
his economic encouragement of these sectors. To the moderate in-
tellectuals and professionals he appeared more modern, cosmopoli-
tan, and dynamic than did the typical deputy or establishment
politician, even though some questioned the rationality of his public-
works projects. At ribbon cuttings, inaugurations, meetings, and
commencements the President and his wife were familiar figures, and
both were known for their patronage of the arts and numerous
charities. All these activities strengthened the President’s position
with many people in the educated middle class and hindered the
efforts of the insurgents to label him as a reactionary who was solely
interested in private aggrandizement. President Chamoun’s organized
support at the popular level was weak, however, because his regional
allies lacked local followings big enough to compete successfully
with the traditional leaders. By the time the crisis broke into the
open—on May 8, after the murder of an anti-Chamoun Christian
journalist—the President could count on the forces of the two best-
organized political parties, the P.P.S. and the Kataeb (the former
Maronite youth group, which had become a party in 1952), the
latter reluctantly. The insurgents, on the other hand, were led by
the rural feudal chiefs whom President Chamoun had been making
persistent attempts to destroy as a political force. Leaders like Sabri
Hamadeh, Ahmad al-Assaad, Saeb Salam, Rashid Karami, and
Kamal Jumblat, however progressive they might be personally, never-

=== PDF_PAGE 132 ===
112 * STRESSES
wwe Alleged infiltration route
ae Territories held by opposition
=== +Main road
a= ee Border
KILOMETERS
MEDITERRANEAN SEA
Map 3
Insurgent Areas in the 1958 Crisis
After United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon, Report (New York: Se-
curity Council document S/4040, 1958), Annex C.

=== PDF_PAGE 133 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 113
theless represented a political order founded on traditional obliga-
tions and structures. Their united opposition to President Chamoun
was motivated to a considerable extent by his efforts to undermine
their power. On the surface, then, the 1958 crisis is typical of con-
flict during the political modernization process in general, in the
sense that it pits a “progressive” head of state who has important
urban middle-class support against the conservative old-style bosses.
To describe the situation in these terms, however, is to overlook
the peculiarities of the 1958 socioeconomic alignment. President
Chamoun was hardly in the same category as the socialist and
nationalist leaders common in the new states. Indeed, the President
was cast in quite the opposite role—a lackey of foreign interests and
high finance, a man bent on establishing personal rule rather than
social justice. Of all the charges leveled by the insurgents against
the President that of “puppet dictator” was uttered with the greatest
fervor.** Nor did the insurgents fit the usual image of feudal reac-
tionaries, although many attempts have been made to give them that
label. Although some of the rural chieftains could hardly be called
progressive, other leaders, like Jumblat, Nassim Majdalani, Henri
Pharaon, and Salam did represent at least an enlightened liberalism.
Furthermore, the insurgents had strong backing from decidedly radi-
cal elements in the youthful, educated middle class. Arab nationalists,
the Baath, a broad stratum of the professionals and intellectuals, the
Najjadeh, the communists (to a minor extent), and university and
high-school students in many areas all gave the insurgency a
progressive and reformist—if not revolutionary—character. Con-
ventional explanations of class conflict thus are not sufficient to
explain the presidential transition crisis of 1958: Class and eco-
nomic interests were divided internally by other overriding loyalties.
It would be a mistake, however, to write off this crisis simply as
an inflated quarrel among the establishment politicians. Although
the demands of the opposition and the Third Force were focused
primarily on purely political questions—the control and use of
power—two new factors had also intervened to impose significant
strains on the old mechanisms. First, a set of policy grievances had
arisen to set rural against urban interests. The rural-urban split had
been aggravated by the Chamoun regime’s deviation from the Na-
tional Pact in the realm of foreign policy and its relative neglect of
the hinterland in domestic affairs. Most of the rural areas were
non-Christian, poor, and pro-U.A.R. Second, new interests and
tendencies within the educated middle class had not become inte-

=== PDF_PAGE 134 ===
114 * STRESSES
grated into the political system, which meant in effect that a new
stream of unorganized power had spilled over the traditional
channels, fed by rising discontents. The system was thus doubly
paralyzed by the rural-urban split and lack of middle-class partici-
pation.
Both sides in the 1958 crisis vied for the support of the newly
politicized but unorganized people in the younger educated middle
class. President Chamoun’s success in obtaining their support was
limited to the P.P.S., the Kataeb, some student groups and pro-
fessionals, and white-collar employees. If he had been able to or-
ganize a rationalized, liberal presidential party, he might have been
able to achieve his objective of naming a successor who would
carry on his policies.** The insurgents also were able to mobilize
only a segment of the younger middle class, but they were on the
whole more successful than the loyalists. If they had succeeded
fully, the 1958 crisis might have become a revolution. The in-
surgents had two powerful drawing cards in addition to their strong
traditional support: Arab nationalism and social reform. Each of the
major insurgent leaders could claim the friendship of President
Nasser and his Syrian colleagues, and this association gave each a
stronger position than that of President Chamoun, whose earlier serv-
ice to Arab nationalism was dismissed as opportunistic. The insurgents
depicted President Chamoun as a tool of the enemies of Arab na-
tionalism; they thus attracted not only Arab students but also Arabs
of the non-Maronite lower middle, peasant, and working classes.
The social reform appeal was articulated most clearly by Kamal
Jumblat in his various demands to the regime but was also em-
phasized by the Arab nationalist and Baathist contingents.** The
fact that the insurgents—composed as they were of both the most
traditional and the most progressive elements—had such a split
personality doubtless made many public-spirited and educated citi-
zens skeptical of their reformist intentions. Some important army
officers, for example, seem to have questioned the insurgents’ sin-
cerity. Because the newly politicized stratum was inchoate both
sides suffered: The regime was denied the capacity to withstand a
serious attack on its structure, whereas the opposition lacked the
means to carry out its objectives. The results were civil war, ex-
tensive foreign intervention, and finally, sectarian strife.
It is remarkable that overt sectarian conflict did not break out
sooner. Although the general situation had been deteriorating for
nearly two years and open fighting had gone on for nearly four

=== PDF_PAGE 135 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 115
months, it was only late in September that the violence took on a
distinct sectarian coloration. This is not to say, however, that the
political expression of sectarianism was not an issue from the be-
ginning of the crisis. Since the days of President Khoury the non-
Christian sects had complained of their underrepresentation in the
institutions of formal power. One of the main points of the in-
surgents was justice and equality in the allocation of jobs and
privileges by sect. This meant a fifty-fifty distribution of important
posts between Christians and non-Christians and an increase in the
power of the Sunnite Prime Minister at the expense of the Maronite
President.** It was only when the “no victor—no vanquished” solu-
tion appeared to go too far in meeting non-Christian demands that
the Kataeb, which had hoped in vain for an international guarantee
of the Lebanese entity, took to the barricades.*°
That sectarian tensions could be so long contained, delayed, and
muted resulted from the fact that membership in the insurgent
- group and in the loyalist group cut across sectarian lines. Several of
the most important leaders of the insurgent opposition and the Third
Force were Christian: The Maronite Patriarch himself opposed the
President and did much to destroy his reputation as a savior of the
Christians. Hamid Frangieh and René Moawad (Maronites) were
also rivals of the President. Nassim Majdalani (Greek Orthodox)
was the key Christian insurgent leader in Beirut. Henri Pharaon
(Greek Catholic) and Charles» Helou (Maronite) led the Third
Force, whose manifestos opposing renewal of Chamoun’s term
warned that the degradation of the Constitution constituted the
gravest possible threat to national unity—that is, to the harmony
between Christians and non-Christians.*® On the loyalist side there
were important non-Christians, including, most prominently, Presi-
dent Chamoun’s Prime Minister, Sami Sulh. There were also a
number of non-Christian loyalists within the government, who had
been brought in by the President to replace the old leaders whom
he was seeking to destroy. These included Sunnites like Fawzi al-
Hoss, Jamil Mikkawi, and Khalil Hibri; Shiites like Kazem Khalil
and Rida Wahid; and Druzes like Kahtan Hamadeh. These men, how-
ever, were eventually branded turncoats to their sects as the crisis
grew hotter. This change was evident when the Muslim Superior
Council held an iftar (the first meal after sunset during the fast of
Ramadan), attended by some 200 notables, to honor the Sunnite
chiefs of the insurgent National Front; Prime Minister Sami Sulh
was not invited.”

=== PDF_PAGE 136 ===
116 * STRESSES
Despite these important cross-sectarian affiliations, there was not
the slightest doubt that the insurgents were mostly non-Christian
and the loyalists mostly Christian. As civil disorder continued, the
veneer of etiquette and tolerance wore away. Even after the main -
issue had been settled and the insurgents had endorsed General
Chehab as the new President, a wave of petty sectarian incidents
broke out. The kidnapping of a Kataeb journalist in the autumn
precipitated a Christian “counterrevolution” against the “no victor—
no vanquished” settlement, which in the opinion of many pro-Chamoun
Christians had in fact given the insurgents control of the country.
As a result of the new violence, President Chehab appointed a new
four-man emergency cabinet that fortunately was able to restore
general stability within a year, and sectarian feelings were reduced
to their former level, just beneath the surface of ordinary political
life.
The crisis of 1958 came about in part because the Maronite
President, by trying to strengthen his own powers, seemed to reduce
the power of the Sunnite Prime Minister’s office and the influence of
non-Christians in general. It was hardly accidental that the President
tried to reduce Muslim and Arab-nationalist influence at a time
when both regional and internal trends were driving non-Christians
to seek a relatively greater role. Lebanon’s political dilemma is re-
flected in the 1958 crisis: The same forces that drive the President to
expand his power drive his rivals to expand theirs. Institutionalized
sectarianism is Lebanon’s substitute for positive consensus, but at
the same time it is a great barrier to Lebanon’s political moderniza-
tion. The parochial divisions in Lebanon’s political culture retard
the development of legitimacy and dynamic policy making. They
also make the state highly vulnerable to foreign manipulation. Social
mobilization makes more people more competent politically, but it
also drastically transforms the standards of political performance
in a system whose primary function is adjustment, not action. Con-
tinuing turbulence in the Middle East, among the Arab states them-
selves and between Arabs and Israelis, imposes additional stresses
on Lebanon, dividing its people—Muslim and Christian—over the
ideologies of Arab nationalism and socialism, over relations with
the Great Powers, and over policies for national security and de-
velopment. As the necessity for political modernization increases, it
is reasonably certain that further crises of the kind described here
may be expected. |

=== PDF_PAGE 137 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 117
NOTES
1T’Orient, March 14-20, 1953.
2 The Arab World (Beirut), August 2-9, 1954; L’Orient, July 30—August 5,
1954; Jean-Pierre Alem, Le Liban (Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1963), p. 81.
* For a description of the “counterrevolution” of September—October, 1958,
see Fahim I. Qubain, Crisis in Lebanon (Washington: Middle East Institute,
1962), pp. 156-61.
* L’Orient, March 20-21, 1965.
5 al-Nahar (Beirut), March 19, 21, 1966.
°“Sectarianism in Lebanon . . . is the guarantee of equitable political and
social representation for the associated minorities . . . [it] is above all a
force for order and peace. . . . Lebanon is composed of sectarian minorities.
These minorities appear under the sectarian label because Lebanon has always
been a refuge for freedom of conscience. Its role as a haven has been possible
because of Lebanon’s geographical situation—in a mountainous land where it
has always been possible to defend oneself and in a maritime land from which
it has always been easy to take to the sea. . . . In spite of many errors and
_ abuses, it is sectarianism that has taught tolerance to the Lebanese. . . . The
Lebanese equilibrium, based on sectarianism, is not an arbitrary equilibrium.
It is by no means prejudice that has created it, but the necessity for recog-
nizing the parochialisms that cover as broad a range as do those among polit-
ical parties. With time, these differences may blur and slowly disappear. Ac-
tually the purpose of Lebanon’s existence lies precisely in the sectarianism
that characterizes it and manifests itself first in the arrangement of legislative
power.” Michel Chiha, Politique Intérieure (Beirut: Trident, 1964), pp. 303-6.
7 The Economist, October 22, 1966, pp. 394-5; Time, November 25, 1966,
p. 116.
8 James C. Davies, “Toward a Theory of Revolution,” American Sociological
Review, 27 (February 1962), 17.
9 For example, the Kataeb reported that the mean age of its members was
twenty-four years. Lucien George and Toufic Mokdessi, Les Partis Libanais
en 1959 (Beirut: L’Orient-al-Jaryda, 1959), p. 36. The mean age of civilians
arrested in the 1962 attempted coup (instigated by the Syrian National Party)
was thirty-two years. Arab nationalist and Baathist leaders reported in inter-
views that their principal recruits were young and educated. Several of the
second-echelon leaders of the Progressive Socialist Party are American Uni-
versity graduates who are now employed in foreign companies in Beirut.
See Chapter 5.
10 Estimates from Lebanese Ministry of General Planning for 1964.
11 Ministry of General Planning figures, 1964.
12 The Lebanese Constitution, Article 49.
13 A good example of the latter is Michel Chiha, a guiding spirit in the
writing of the Constitution, who was related by marriage to President Khoury
and who supported him during the 1947 election. See his Le Jour editorial of
April 13, 1948, “Sur la Révision de la Constitution,” reprinted in Chiha,
op. cit., pp. 148-53.

=== PDF_PAGE 138 ===
118 * STRESSES
14 See the Committee of National Liberation manifesto in L’Orient, August
12, 1949.
15 Republic of Lebanon, Bulletin Statistique Trimestrial (1959); Republic
of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités de Développement du
Liban, I (Beirut: 1960-1961), p. 84, hereafter cited as IRFED Report.
16'L’Orient, April 2351952:
17 Bechara al-Khoury, Haqd’iq lubndniyyah [Lebanese Truths], III (Beirut:
Awraq lubnaniyyah, 1961), 442 ff., and Sami Sulh, Mudakkirat [Memoirs]
(Beirut: Maktabat al-fiqr al-‘arabi, 1960), p. 215, note that they were aware
of the deterioration but could not command the power and influence to check
it. See also George Britt, “Lebanon’s Popular Revolution,” Middle East Journal,
7 (Winter 1953), 1-17.
18 The rally reportedly was attended by some 30,000 people. Alem, op. cit.,
SLT.
i 19 Khoury, op. cit., III, 449, claims that his previous leniency in the face of
insults to the Presidency had been interpreted as a sign of weakness rather
than of tolerance and that suspensions of opposition newspapers were neces-
sary to preserve the dignity of the state. The suspensions had been prompted
by an article in Kamal Jumblat’s newspaper headlined, “He was put there by
foreigners; let the people remove him.”
20 For the text, see Republic of Lebanon, al-Jaridah al-rasmiyyah [The
Official Gazette] 1951-1952 (Beirut: 1952), pp. 2505-10 (The Official Gazette
contains the proceedings of the Chamber of Deputies). See also Sulh, op. cit.,
pp. 222-7. “Rule is divided between the Serail [Prime Minister’s Office] and
the [Presidential] palace,” Sulh told the deputies. He also charged that un-
named elements in the palace had fought against him when he tried to make
laws against gambling, hashish growing, and smuggling goods into Israel and
when he attempted to pass a regulation requiring the newly rich to disclose
the sources of their incomes. Some people, he continued, had tried to use the
state to further their own greed.
21 Three months earlier President Khoury had offered General Chehab the
Presidency. At a meeting held some time between June 15 and 20, Khoury
told Chehab of his disgust at the pettiness, disloyalty, and greed that were
poisoning the political atmosphere. The President said that he would like to
retire while he still had the power to choose a worthy successor—Chehab.
The General politely refused. Khoury, op. cit., UI, 451.
211d, pear:
23 Kamal Jumblat, Hagigat ‘an al-thawrat al-lubnaniyyah [The Truth about
the Lebanese Revolution] (Beirut: Dar al-nashr al-‘arabiyyah, 1959), Puce
24 Casualty estimates vary a great deal. An army officer declared in an
interview in 1963 that about 4,000 were killed and wounded. “A correspondent
lately in Beirut,” writing in The World Today, 15 (April 4, 1959), 136, said
that the number of fatalities was perhaps 2,000. Emile Bustani, an active
participant, stated that 3,000 had died, of whom 1,000 were Syrians. Emile
Bustani, March Arabesque (London: Hale, 1961), p. 86.
2> The most detailed account of the 1958 crisis in English is Qubain, op.
cit. See also a critical review of this book by Nabih Faris in Middle East
Forum, 38 (January 1, 1962), 32; Charles Thayer, Diplomat (New York:

=== PDF_PAGE 139 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 119
Harper, 1959), chaps. 1, 2; Richard I. Miller, Dag Hammarskjéld and Crisis
Diplomacy (New York: Pyramid, 1961), chaps. 6, 7; and Leila M. T. Meo,
Lebanon: Improbable Nation (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965),
chaps. 7, 9. A knowledgeable and succinct description appears in Alem, op.
cit., pp. 87-96. See also Alem’s article, “Troubles Insurrectionnels au Liban,”
Orient (Paris), June 1958, pp. 37-47; and, in the same issue, Pierre Rondot,
“Quelques Réflexions sur les Structures du Liban,” pp. 23-6. See also Kamal
Salibi, “Lebanon Since the Crisis of 1958,” The World Today, January 1961,
pp. 32-42; the reports from the representative of the American Universities
Field Staff in Beirut, C. F. Gallagher before, during, and after the crisis,
and Desmond Stewart, Turmoil in Beirut (London: Wingate, 1959). For a
review of writing in Arabic on the subject, see Malcolm H. Kerr, “Lebanese
Views on the 1958 Crisis,” Middle East Journal, 15 (Spring 1961), 211-7.
Important writings by participants include Jumblat, op. cit.; Henri Pharaon’s
essays in his Au Service du Liban et de Son Unité (Beirut: Le Jour, 1959);
Camille Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris: Gallimard, 1963); Sulh, op.
cit.; and Robert Murphy, Diplomat Among Warriors (Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday, 1964).
26“T have my reasons. I shall make known my point of view at an appro-
~ priate time. That will be in May, June, or July. . . . I understand very well
the anxiety that the possibility of revising the Constitution arouses in you. I
am myself against the revision in principle. There is, however, one point on
which I wish to leave no doubt: If, when the proper time comes, I am not
assured of finding a successor who will guarantee the continuation of my
policies, I declare here and now that I shall reconsider my position.” L’Orient,
December 31, 1957.
27 T’Orient, June 5, 1958. Cf. Prime Minister Sami Sulh’s statement of
May 27: “Je dois dire en toute sincérité que le Président de la République
ne m’a jamais entretenu de son désir de renouveler son mandat. Ni le Chef
de l’Etat, ni le Gouvernement, n’ont inscrit cette affaire dans leur programme.
En outre, le Gouvernement n’a entrepris aucune démarche dans ce sens et ne
présentera jamais 4 la Chambre un projet d’amendement de la Constitution.”
[“I must say in all sincerity that the President of the Republic has never
mentioned to me any desire to extend his stay in power. Neither the Chief
of State nor the Government has included such an item in its future plans.
Besides, the Government has taken no steps in that direction and will never
present to the Chamber a proposal for amending the Constitution to permit
such an extension.”] L’Orient, May 28, 1958.
283A new article of political faith was presented to the Lebanese eight
months ago: If you are not a Chamounian, then you are a traitor and a Syro-
Bolshevik.” Georges Naccache, “A I’Heure de Mme. Afaf,” L’Orient, Janu-
ary 17, 1958.
29 One may obtain a rough idea of the extent of U.A.R. interference by
examining the following sources: United Nations Security Council, Official
Records (New York: United Nations, 1958), Meeting 825, June 11, 1958;
and the Swedish resolution creating a United Nations Observation Group in
Lebanon, Resolution $/4023. The five reports submitted by UNOGIL be-
tween July 3 and November 17, 1958, are found in United Nations Security

=== PDF_PAGE 140 ===
120 * STRESSES
Council documents S/4040, S/4069, S/4085, S/4100, and S/4114. The ob-
server group lacked sufficient personnel and access to the borders during the
critical period. See also the debates in the Security Council of June 6 (Meeting
823) and June 10 (Meeting 824) on the Lebanese complaint (S/40007) and of
July 21 (Meeting 835) on the question of Syrian subversion. See also The
New York Times for the period, especially “Unsifted U.S. Intelligence Reports
of Syrian Complicity,” July 17, 1958, p. 9. The memoirs of such leading par-
ticipants as Camille Chamoun, op. cit., and Kamal Jumblat, op. cit., are also
illuminating. The insurgent leaders interviewed freely admitted that they had
received aid of various sorts, although they emphasized that the crisis was es-
sentially an internal matter. See Qubain, op. cit., pp. 133-53, for a detailed ac-
count of the quantity and the source of the aid.
30 TRFED Report, I, 84.
31 This point is evident in the insurgents’ “14 points,” which formed the
basis for the formal termination of the rebellion at the end of July 1958.
Eleven of these points are directed specifically at limiting the President’s per-
sonal power and policy options. The manifesto is a kind of latter-day Magna
Charta. The text was printed in L’Orient and The Arab World of July 30,
1958.
32 After his term expired, President Chamoun tried to form such a party,
but his National Liberal Party, like several other parties in Lebanon, is hard
to distinguish from a traditional client following. See Chapter 4.
83 For example, in a declaration on the eve of the Presidential election,
Jumblat made a set of demands independent of the fourteen points of the
insurgents. He asked that two portfolios (one of them the Ministry of the
Interior) be set aside for socialist ministers exclusively and called for an in-
dependent development board, national health insurance, and financial re-
forms like the creation of a central bank. Arab World Opinion, July 29,
1958.
34 Point number eleven of the fourteen points submitted by the insurgents
on the eve of the Presidential election. See The Arab World and L’Orient,
July 30, 1958; and Beirut al-Massa, July 29, 1958.
35 Concerning the insurgents’ manifesto the Kataeb stated in its newspaper:
“There was nothing constructive or social in these demands. They are pri-
marily political demands emanating from an inferiority complex and hatred.
. . . You should read these . . . demands and laugh. . . . We refused to
believe that such a terrorist movement where crime abounded could really be
regarded as a ‘revolution’ or as an expression of the will of the people.” al-
‘Amal, July 31, 1958, quoted in The Arab World, August 1, 1958.
36 See, for example, the text of the Third Force Press Conference in L’Orient,
January 18, 1958: “L’anarchie a envahi les services publiques; les fonction-
naires ont été mobilisés et les ressources de l’Etat ont été mises 4 contribution
au profit des militants de la réconduction. Dans toutes les colonnes des jour-
naux, rebondit tous les matins la cascade des scandales ot sont impliquées
les plus hautes personnalités. . . .”
[““Anarchy has invaded the public services; state officials have been mobil-
ized, and the resources of the State have been diverted to private profits for
militant supporters of the President’s continuation in power. Every morning,

=== PDF_PAGE 141 ===
Lebanon’s Political Dilemma + 121
in the columns of every newspaper, there rebound the cascading scandals in
which even the highest leaders are implicated.”] See also the Resolutions of
the Interconfessional Congress, signed by eighty-two dignitaries (of whom half
were Christian), meeting at the house of Henri Pharaon on March 27, 1958,
in L’Orient, March 28, 1958. The Congress called for a return to the prin-
ciples of the National Pact.
37 L’Orient, April 18, 1958. The American Ambassador held his own iftar
and invited seventeen pro-Western Muslim notables, including the Prime Min-
ister.

=== PDF_PAGE 142 ===
