=== PDF_PAGE 145 ===
CHAPTER - 4
The Establishment and Its Politics
Foreign visitors to Lebanon are inevitably told about the Belgian
economist and statesman Dr. Paul Van Zeeland, who was com-
missioned to advise the Lebanese government about the economy.
After careful study he is supposed to have declared, “I don’t know
what it is you are doing, but whatever it is, keep it up.” * If it is hard
to explain Lebanon’s prosperity, it is even harder to explain its
political viability. The divisive forces of parochialism, external
meddling, and uneven social change create a genuine political
dilemma for the young Republic, yet somehow its political system
keeps going, avoiding disaster and confounding the pessimists.
Only once, during the insurgency of summer 1958, has the machine
completely collapsed, and even then it was restored quite success-
fully; few other newly independent states have fared as well. A
political system that performs even moderately well under such
adverse conditions is worthy of further study.
How does the political system in Lebanon function and what are
its prospects for breaking out of the dilemma outlined in the pre-
ceding chapters? This and the following chapters attempt to answer
these questions. These chapters will examine the adjustments and
innovations of the traditional elite and the modern counterelite, the
broadening scope of political life, and the development of the execu-
tive powers and responsibilities that political modernization requires.
In all these areas Lebanese ingenuity is readily apparent. It is easy
for a political scientist to admire the techniques of bargaining and
coordination that maintain domestic tranquillity; but, ingenious as
these techniques may be, they are inadequate to surmount the basic
1235

=== PDF_PAGE 146 ===
126 * ACTORS
dilemma. Without strong institutions Lebanon must count upon ex-
traordinary good luck.
Power in Lebanon is monopolized by an establishment of clerics,
semifeudal political bosses, bankers, businessmen, and lawyers. The
members of the establishment come from fewer than fifty prominent
families. The establishment derives its influence partly from these
traditional affiliations and partly from economic success, and Leba-
nese politics today is still essentially the competition among its
members to advance their various parochial interests—sectarian
prerogatives, commercial privileges, and pork-barrel benefits. In-
creasingly, however, politics is beginning to revolve around a new
competition between this establishment as a whole and the out-
siders—the more recently politicized strata excluded from significant
participation in the formal political system.
The most striking aspect of the Lebanese establishment is its lack
of modern political organizations. The personalities and groups to
be described here are highly sophisticated but parochially organized.
In general, the prevailing political organization in the establishment
is the personal clique. The influential landlords, lawyers, and busi-
nessmen of Lebanese politics operate through such-informal group-
ings. The Constitutional Bloc and National Bloc discussed here are
important examples. There are, however, more elaborate organiza-
tions in the establishment. For example, religious leaders utilize
their sectarian organizations in politics: This practice is particularly
notable within the Christian communities. Two establishment groups
have developed a degree of specialized political organization that is
especially noteworthy, although both remain essentially sectarian in
character and are dominated by personalities whose influence is
rooted in parochial rather than in modern affiliations. They are
the Armenian Tashnaq Party and the Kataeb, a basically Maronite
organization.
The establishment, although it is composed largely of particularistic
leaders, is definitely capable of political adaptation and innovation,
but probably not as much as Lebanese conditions seem to require.
Extensive interviews with a large number of notables reveal that
there is a shared doctrine of sophisticated pragmatism in the es-
tablishment that makes possible significant, though circumscribed,
flexibility in political behavior. There is a common understanding
of the limits that Lebanese particularism places on political choice
and a sensitivity to political currents both in Lebanon and in
the Arab world. This sensitivity within the establishment explains

=== PDF_PAGE 147 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 127
perhaps the development of a mildly progressive philosophy among
some notables since the end of the 1940s. This chapter describes the
several elements that the establishment comprises and analyzes its
changing factional patterns.
THE MEMBERS
Clerics
As long as Lebanon has had significant minority groups, men of re-
ligion have performed political functions as leaders of their com-
munities in a hostile environment. Under Mamluk and Ottoman
rule, the Christian sects especially developed a solidarity and a sus-
picion of outsiders that remains evident in Mount Lebanon today.
The clergy embodies and perpetuates these attitudes. Sixty years be-
fore France established the state of Greater Lebanon, the Maronite
- Patriarch Boulus Masaad was a major instigator of civil strife that
led to the great massacre of Christians. Indeed, the Patriarch was
a general and a conspirator, as well as a religious leader.” At the
end of World War I, with the withdrawal of the ruling Sunnite
Turks in prospect, the heads of the religious minorities—especially
the Maronite and Greek Orthodox—lost no time in trying to protect
and enlarge their influence. The inquiries of the King-Crane Com-
mission show clearly that the primary political groups at that time
were religious in character and that the primary political question
was the distribution of power among them.* The political role of
the Maronite Patriarch Elias Butros Hawayek in creating a Christian-
dominated Greater Lebanon (exemplified by his meeting with
Georges Clemenceau) was more important than that of all the
politicians of the area.*
Once installed, the Mandate authorities secured their position by
soliciting the support of the clerics, and the clerics also found the
close relationship with the authorities advantageous.’ During the
Mandate the religious leaders found their privileged position com-
promised by rising demands for independence, but, though their in-
fluence was challenged, their activity hardly decreased. Stephen
Longrigg comments on the “fulminations” of the Patriarch Antoun
Arida in the last days of the Mandate and characterizes his policy
as pro-Zionist and anticommunist and, above all, as devoted to his
own community.® Gabriel Puaux, a Protestant and the last High
Commissioner before the Vichy regime, has left a vivid description

=== PDF_PAGE 148 ===
128 * ACTORS
of the “panthéon syrien,” in which he catalogues each of the
sectarian leaders with whom he had to deal as High Commissioner.’
Puaux comments wryly on Patriarch Arida’s taste for temporal
power and his readiness to interfere in administrative activities’ and
on the efforts of the Greek Orthodox leaders to use his (Puaux’s)
support to heal schisms in the Church. Puaux contrasts Arida’s
persistent political manipulation with the dignified conduct of the
Mufti Toufic Khaled and the mystical activity of the Shiites. For
the French Mandate authorities, calming mutual fears among these
sects was the chief problem of governing, whereas each religious
head felt that his essential duty was to maintain the security of his
flock and, if possible, to obtain a more equitable place for it in
Lebanon.
After independence the clerics still played an impressive role in
Lebanese politics, although they had competition from strong secular
powers. The unusually corrupt parliamentary elections in 1947 were
strongly opposed by various religious dignitaries, including the
Maronite Patriarch, the Greek Orthodox Archbishop of Beirut, and
the Grand Mufti of Lebanon, as well as important Shiites, Druzes,
and Catholics.® The religious leaders, though generally disagreeing
among themselves, showed solid unity in 1952 against the Lebanese
lawyers’ syndicate’s strike. The lawyers struck for three months in
protest of a law that limited their rights to practice and also en-
hanced the power of religious courts in matters of personal status.
The strike failed, indicating that the religious leaders would not
tolerate a diminution of their traditional powers and that the state
was unable to force change in that direction.’? In the 1958 crisis
clericalism was still a significant factor. The Maronite Patriarch,
Monsignor Butros-Boulus Meouchy, was probably the strongest of
President Camille Chamoun’s opponents in Lebanon; certainly
Monsignor Meouchy was outspoken in his criticism.’ The non-
Christian religious leaders also played an important role. It will be
recalled that President Chamoun’s regime suffered a serious blow
when the Mufti pointedly neglected to invite any government officials
to a Muslim iftar, violating the usual courtesy. There is today no
sign that the men of religion are about to retire from the political
arena.” Indeed, as long as sectarian suspicions remain, they can
hardly avoid taking political roles.
A closer examination of the role of the Maronite Patriarch re-
veals the nature of his political involvement. Monsignor Meouchy
is not at all apologetic about engaging in politics, for it is the

=== PDF_PAGE 149 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics * 129
tradition that the Maronite Patriarch, as the shepherd, protects and
counsels his flock. A man of strong character, the Patriarch looks
down upon the Lebanese political scene from his mountain residence
at Bkerke with benign tolerance and tells the visitor that Lebanon
is a family and that, like all families, it has its little squabbles. In
practical politics his attitude is less detached. He speaks as bluntly
as any other politician and makes it clear that he is a partisan in
the continuing struggle to maintain equilibrium. The Patriarch does
not strike out at Muslim politicians or notables as much as he
does at other Christian leaders. Indeed, he has devoted considerable
energy to opposing two Presidents of the Republic, Camille Chamoun
and Fuad Chehab. There is ample precedent for such opposition:
His predecessor fought a continuing battle with the Khoury regime,
perhaps because he resented the intrusion of a Maronite secular
leader into the relationship between shepherd and flock. It is sug-
gested that personal differences led to Patriarch Meouchy’s break
with President Chamoun, principally because the President did not
take kindly to clerical advice. During the 1958 crisis, however, the
Patriarch justified his opposition by arguing that President Chamoun
was leading the Christians toward disaster by jeopardizing their posi-
tion in the Arab world. He worked vigorously to erode the con-
servative Christian support that President Chamoun relied on in-
creasingly in his struggle with the rural bosses, the progressives,
and President Nasser. President Chamoun’s activities were increas-
ing sectarian divisions within Lebanon, but, during the crisis, there
was more amity between the Patriarch and the non-Christian com-
munities than ever before or since. His stand, however, cost him the
support of many conservative Maronites.** Some well-informed ob-
servers believe that Patriarch Meouchy had his eye on the Presidency
in 1958 and that this ambition was the reason he worked so
diligently against any movement for the renewal of President
Chamoun’s term. General Chehab was scarcely installed as Presi-
dent when the Patriarch and ex-President Chamoun were recon-
ciled. The Patriarch also turned against Chehab immediately after
the first signs of military intrusions into the political sphere began
to appear. Patriarch Meouchy’s view of President Nasser’s role in
the 1958 crisis changed from praise of the Egyptian President's
benevolent neutrality to castigation of Nasser’s blatant interference,
to which Lebanon had luckily avoided succumbing. On the eve of
the expiration of President Chehab’s term in 1964, the Patriarch
again made his stand against renewal clearly known and was re-

=== PDF_PAGE 150 ===
130 * ACTORS
ported to be lunching with ex-President Chamoun. The issues be-
tween the Patriarch and President Chehab were (in the Patriarch’s
view) Lebanese subservience to the policy of the United Arab Re-
public and the interference of Lebanese army officers in political
affairs.
The Patriarch’s influence derives from his exalted religious posi-
tion in a culture in which religion and politics are inseparable. His
most important instrument of influence is the priestly hierarchy,
which serves not only as a means for disseminating his authoritative
views but also as an effective intelligence service. He views Lebanon
as essentially a Christian country and believes that his duty is to
keep it that way. The Patriarch feels that the best way of keeping
this status quo is to assert and constantly reassert the role of the
Maronites and of the Patriarchy in the delicate balance of power.
It appears that the Patriarch does not believe that the balance is
self-regulating: Only by positive action can the interests of his
community be preserved. The future is uncertain because so much
hinges on the behavior of a few people—the President, for in-
stance, may not always be the wisest member of the Maronite com-
munity—and on forces outside the country. Social policy is
clearly the Patriarch’s secondary concern, apparently because he
believes that, if the sectarian balance is maintained, social policy
will take care of itself. The Patriarch also interprets foreign policy
through the screen of sectarian requirements, which dictate that
the Church must skillfully counter any trends that threaten the
Christian predominance. For example, when Egypt and Syria were
united and exerting pressure on Lebanese Muslims in 1958, it was
the wisest policy to show flexible acquiescence, within limits, rather
than rigid opposition; but, when there was an opportunity to play
one neighbor off against another—Syria against Egypt, in 1961,
for example—the Church was quick to exploit it. At the same time,
lines to the West and opposition to communism have always been
maintained.
Landlords
Great landlords are another category in the establishment’s mem-
bership. These men have inherited sufficient lands to provide them
with substantial income, which frees them for other pursuits, and to
create local clienteles of tenant and yeoman farmers, laborers, and
neighbors, which have considerable political utility. These land-
holders are generally found in North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and

=== PDF_PAGE 151 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 131
the Biga, where vestiges of economic feudalism remain, and they
typically sublet property to lesser families and peasants. In 1953,
for example, Joseph Skaf owned an estimated 5,000 fertile acres in
the Biqa; the heads of the Khalil, Osseiran, Zein, and Assaad
families held about 3,700 acres apiece in South Lebanon (as well
as five seats in Parliament); and in the Akkar plain in North
_ Lebanon Abboud Abdel Razzak and his sons probably owned
about 5,000 acres.‘ Under the Ottoman administration many of
these prominent landed families had cooperated with Constantinople
and in return had been allowed to manage affairs and to settle con-
flicts in their localities. When Greater Lebanon was created, the
French found it necessary to acquire allies among these great
families in order to check the Arab nationalist movement in Syria.
The gravitation of Sunnite and nationalist landowners toward Da-
mascus made the task of recruiting notables more difficult in the
outer regions of Greater Lebanon than in the Mountain. Neverthe-
less, France succeeded in winning support in Tripoli from the re-
spected Mufti Shaykh Muhammad al-Jisr. In the Biqa two im-
portant Shiite families, the Haidars and the Hamadehs, each split
their allegiance between Beirut and Damascus, and, in southern
Mount Lebanon, the French struck up an agreement with the
Jumblat family, leaders of one of the two rival Druze factions and
traditionally clients of the British.’’ In South Lebanon Hussein Zein
(Shiite), a notable of Nabatieh, was drawn into the ruling circle
of Greater Lebanon, as were members of the important families of
Osseiran and Chehab.
Independence from France brought to an end the isolation of Sun-
nite landowners from the established institutions. The rapprochement
was symbolized by Riad Sulh, the principal Lebanese Arab na-
tionalist, who became Prime Minister in the first government. Just
as nineteenth-century Lebanon was run by a gallery of landed
notables, so is the independent Lebanese Republic governed by the
descendants of these leaders: in North Lebanon Karamis, Miraabis,
Mugaddams, and Jisrs (Sunnite), Frangiehs and Moawads (Maro-
nite), and Ghusns (Greek Orthodox); in the Biga Hamadehs and
Haidars (Shiite) and Skafs (Greek Catholic); in South Lebanon
Assaads, Osseirans, and Zeins (Shiite) and Sulhs (Sunnite). In
Mount Lebanon the great personalities of the “age of independence”
bore the same names as nineteenth-century aristocrats: Chehab,
Jumblat, Khazen, Karam, Abi-lamaa, Arslan.
The feudal gentlemen of the past had personalities strong enough

=== PDF_PAGE 152 ===
132 * ACTORS
to induce considerable respect, if not affection, from their clienteles.
Today, with increasing modernization, the descendants of these
men perhaps lack the magnetism, strength, and ruthlessness of
Bashir II,1° but postwar Lebanon still has its share of colorful landed
political bosses, and they play a decisive part in present-day affairs.
A glance at some of these leaders in action will illustrate their style
of politics. Richard Pearse, a British agent, arrived in Tripoli in
1944 and wrote:
Just before my arrival at Tripoli the Prime Minister, a native of the
town, had been shot up in his car close to his home by the gunmen
of one of his rivals. The Prime Minister, Abdul [Hamid] Karami,
was pro-British; his assailant . .. pro-French. Political passion
was also the cause of trouble between various guests. Politically
speaking, Tripoli was not exactly a dull place. Political murder, gang-
sterism and racketeering were as common as they were in Chicago
in the late twenties.1”
Another boss, Ahmad al-Assaad (Shiite), held extensive lands
around Taybeh in South Lebanon and wielded great influence be-
cause he could project his own local power throughout South
Lebanon and indeed through the whole country under the electoral
system of the “grand list.” ** At the height of his influence, in 1948,
he was more powerful in South Lebanon than his friend the Presi-
dent of the Republic. The Lebanese journalist Kesrouan Labaki was
hardly exaggerating when he wrote that Assaad and Sabri Hamadeh,
the Shiite leader of the Baalbek-Hermel area, actually ruled Leba-
non: Assaad was the political boss of South Lebanon, Hamadeh
was the political boss of the Biqa, and Assaad was the father-in-law
of Hamadeh. Assaad, idol of the Shiites of Jebel Amal, was also
master of the Greek Orthodox of Merjayoun and the Sunnites in
Saida by virtue of his eminence in the region. Hamadeh controlled
the Greek Catholics in Zahleh. When these two combined with
Majid Arslan, the Druze leader of Chouiefat, who also controlled
the Maronites in Jbeil, they could control Parliament.”
Landlord dominence has declined somewhat since the early years
of independence; nevertheless, it remains a major force. Following
the forced resignation of President Bechara al-Khoury in September
1952, Assaad’s alliance with the national government was broken,
and a new electoral law did away with the grand list, reducing
Assaad’s power, but he was still a man to reckon with. On March
9, 1954, Prime Minister Abdallah Yafi, in the course of a typically

=== PDF_PAGE 153 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 133
warm parliamentary debate, told Assaad’s son Kamel (the only suc-
cessful member of the Assaad ticket in the 1953 elections) that he
and his father had ruined the country. The next day father and
son mobilized a crowd of 1,000 partisans that marched to Parlia-
ment demanding an apology. One person was killed in the ensuing
riot. Although Assaad never received his apology, neither was he
called to account for the disturbances.?° In their own local domains,
the landlords are still virtually supreme, acknowledging no party,
and they are still able to hold the state itself at bay, as the 1958
crisis dramatically illustrated. As late as 1960, Sabri Hamadeh, one
of the most important landlords of the Baalbek-Hermel area, is re-
ported to have shot an officer when he refused to allow Hamadeh’s
friends to enter the polling place with him. Not only did Hamadeh
escape censure, but he was also elected Speaker of the Parliament
shortly afterward.**
Saeb Salam is an atypical member of the land-owning elite in
the sense that he lives in Beirut. Perhaps he is also more sophisticated
than others of his class, but in a number of other respects he is
representative. In his district he is a figure who commands deference,
loyalty, and protection. When Saeb Salam campaigns in Mousseitbeh,
he does not need to dwell at length on programs or positions: Every-
body knows all about him and what he will do for them. They
know that the Salams (Sunnites) are an old political family, that
Saeb’s father was an important-enemy of the Turks, and that Saeb
played a major role in the agitation for Lebanese independence as
head of the Muslim Congress. They know he resisted Chamoun in
1958 and can see the bullet holes in the mirror in his house. They
may not know that he studied at the American University of Beirut
and the London School of Economics, but they recognize his trade-
marks—the cigar and the carnation. Every weekday the outer parlor
of Salam’s elegant old house is filled with people in trouble wanting
help, and they will be unhappy unless they see Salam personally.
Salam can and does help in many ways. He settles private quarrels
and intercedes with the municipality for constituents. Like the
American city boss in an earlier time, Salam distributes money
occasionally to the slum dwellers in his area who need medical
treatment, and, in the tradition of many an American philanthropist,
he contributes time, money, and influence to the Magasid Islamic
Education Society. Like most Lebanese Muslim leaders he professes
admiration for Nasser and displays on his mantelpiece a signed
photograph of the Egyptian leader.

=== PDF_PAGE 154 ===
134 * ACTORS
No Lebanese leader understands the factional process better than
Salam. On more than one occasion he has successfully thrown his
weight against the Sunnite mainstream in order, he says, to blur
the sectarian aspect of various struggles. In the presidential elec-
tion of 1964, for example, he would not endorse a renewal of
General Chehab’s mandate and thus placed himself on the side of
the conservative Christians in an issue that had begun to take on a
sectarian coloration. It would be naive to suppose that this aim was
his sole motivation, but concern for balance was at least one factor
in his decision. Salam, in fact, has produced an elaborate analysis
of the Lebanese problem in an address before the Lebanese Cénacle,
a society of prominent intellectuals, entitled “One Lebanon, Not
Two.” ” Sectarianism is not the only problem that Salam considers
relevant to Lebanese politics. In Salam’s opinion, politics in Leba-
non—and in most other countries—is guided by the big merchants
and financiers. He believes that this rich class is more exploitative in
Lebanon than elsewhere, however; the financiers keep only enough
capital in the country to sustain their flow of income and salt away
the surplus in Europe. Therefore, this “blood sucking” is worse than
the high finance in the United States or Britain because there the
capitalists confine their greed within the limits imposed by the na-
tional interest. In Lebanon, if something should go wrong, the
financier can simply leave on the next plane. Coming from a man
regularly accused by the radical Left of being a prime example of
such a politician, Salam’s expressed views are unusually candid.
Salam believes that politics under such circumstances tends to reflect
this exploitative, tomorrow-we-may-die spirit, and that there is, at
worst, an atmosphere of “every man for himself.” In Salam’s view,
only very rich countries can afford such political anarchism, and
Lebanon, although it is relatively prosperous, finds itself increasingly
burdened with such public problems as slums. Salam thinks that, if
anything, the political process is less adequate in the 1960s than it
was twenty years earlier or during the Mandate. Today, in Salam’s
view, individual services to constituents are a much more im-
portant key to political success than before, and politicians are
more inclined to use their government posts to recover whatever they
paid out to capture them. Lebanon needs structural political reform,
he argues: “Enlightened” notables are not enough. At the elite level
it is possible to form coalitions across religious and regional lines—
for example, Salam, Kamel al-Assaad (Shiite, South Lebanon),
Sleiman Frangieh (Maronite, North Lebanon), Joseph Skaf (Greek

=== PDF_PAGE 155 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 135
Catholic, the Biga), and Nassim Majdalani (Greek Orthodox,
Beirut) can form a parliamentary grouping—but at the mass level,
Salam feels, each of these leaders is limited to his sect and neighbor-
hood because he is indelibly labeled in the public mind as a Sunnite
leader, a Biga landowner, and so on. In Lebanon there is no left-
right spectrum, he argues, only Christian-Muslim. Prisoners of cir-
- cumstance, the notables who are liberally inclined can only do what
they can for their own people and try to keep the system evenly
balanced.
The clerics and feudal bosses can be distinguished from other ele-
ments of the political elite by their traditional following, their paro-
chial outlook, and their strong character. These characteristics
have given them enormous influence within their respective geo-
graphical, social, and sectarian domains. Political relations among
these leaders, which reflect this local autonomy, are analogous to
the relations among small states in a multipolar international sys-
tem. The tacit operating principle of the Lebanese system is that
none of the actors can be removed or seriously challenged. They
therefore form alliances that might remind the diplomatic his-
torian of Renaissance Italy, and they deal with one another on the
basis of sovereign equality. Bargaining is the primary process for
peaceful political relations. French imperial interests and Wilsonian
liberalism converged upon Lebanon in the wake of the disintegrat-
ing Ottoman Empire; and the institutions of parliamentary democ-
racy established by General Gouraud and his colleagues not only
harmonized with the prevailing political elements but also served
French policy through the exploitation of parochial divisions. The
political elite, however, began to expand even before the ink was
dry on the declaration that created Greater Lebanon.
Lawyers and Businessmen
When the French seized authority in 1918, they found clerics and
landlords already playing significant roles in the political process,
but they also discovered a source of potential political assistance
among the notables of business and legal background. The ad-
ministrative needs of the French helped to recruit these notables
for positions of power. Indeed, even independent Lebanon’s found-
ing fathers—the nuclei of the Constitutional Bloc (Destour) and
the National Bloc, which later became the main rival political
groups—were drawn into politics by the High Commission.”* Some-
times it was not clear whether these new recruits were the tools of

=== PDF_PAGE 156 ===
136 * ACTORS
the French or vice versa; the relationship was more likely one of
mutual exploitation.”* In any event, by recruiting prominent bank-
ers and lawyers into their civil service, the Mandate authorities
took an important step toward preparing Greater Lebanon for self-
government and added a modernizing element to the local political
elite. This element differed from the clerics and landlords in its
cosmopolitan outlook and its European culture. The lawyers and
businessmen had studied philosophic and economic liberalism,
whereas the traditional leaders in general had no abstract philosophy
of government. The new cosmopolitan elite—illuminated by per-
sonalities like Michel Chiha, Emile Edde, Bechara al-Khoury, and
Camille Chamoun—was committed to the development of Greater
Lebanon as a viable and independent state with modern political
institutions. At that time, modern political institutions meant liberal
parliamentary democracy. Viability meant, at the minimum, a
condition of peaceful coexistence among the sectarian and other
factions. As Michel Chiha has put it, “Le Liban, au fond, est une
belle et noble tentative de cohabitation paisible des religions, des
traditions, des races. C’est une tentative naturelle que Vhistoire pro-
pose comme un témoignage plus décisif encore que celui de la
Suisse au coeur de l’Europe.” *°
The 1930s were years of political ferment in Lebanon and the
rest of the Arab world. The activist spirit of the times was mani-
fested in new political organizations:It_was a time of radical ex-
perimentation in which communist, pan-Syrian, pan-Arab, pan-
Islamic, and militant Christian nationalist movements began to
challenge French control of the Lebanon. Many of these radical
movements were outlawed and persecuted.*® At the same time,
within the French-sponsored elite, the lawyers and businessmen
were organizing to bring about Lebanese independence. Among
the moderate Sunnites a group of notables headed by Kazem Sulh,
called the Nida al-Qawmi (National Appeal), set forth a doctrine
embodying the principles of what was to become the National
Pact.*’ Groups like the National Democratic Congress agitated
against the Mandate. The High Commission itself contributed
to the elaboration of groups by assisting factions favorable to the
French interest, like the Party of Lebanese Unity, headed by
the nephew of the Maronite Patriarch. The major actors within
the establishment, however, were Emile Edde and Bechara al-
Khoury and their respective followings, the National Bloc and the
Constitutional Bloc (Destour).

=== PDF_PAGE 157 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 137
The National Bloc and the Constitutional Bloc were the organi-
zational manifestations of the rivalry between Emile Edde and
Bechara al-Khoury. Edde and Khoury were both Maronites, both
owed their positions of influence to the Mandate, both spoke fluent
French and Arabic, and both held law degrees from French uni-
versities. Khoury, in fact, had begun his law practice in Edde’s
Office. Edde, who was brought back to Beirut on a French warship
in 1919, immediately became one of the leading politicians, but
the Mandate authorities shrewdly elevated Khoury into the ad-
ministration to balance him.** The rivalry that developed between
these two gave the French a strong position as balancer; this role
was evident, for example, in their manipulation of the presidential
election in 1936, which Edde, the favorite of the French, won.
The basic rivalry between these two men also molded the political
framework of Mount Lebanon for the first decade after indepen-
dence.
Edde, who is remembered as an inflexible, short-tempered, vola-
tile personality, was culturally Francophile and, like most of the
Maronite elite, well aware of France’s historical role as the pro-
tector of that sect. Edde’s circle was limited to the exclusively
French-speaking commercial and financial society of Beirut. By
contrast, Khoury used his position in the Interior Department to
cultivate a wide circle of acquaintances among the non-Christian
notables of the outlying areas. The rivalry between these two men,
visible since 1926, crystallized after 1929 when they began the
campaigns for the Presidency that eventually ended with the French
suspending the Constitution. A combination of personal ambition
and programmatic goals led each to form caucuses and to espouse
different views on the issue of national independence. Edde pledged
the National Bloc to maintaining France’s special relationship with
Lebanon even after independence, a view that was in harmony with
the Mandate policy. Khoury’s Constitutional Bloc advocated restora-
tion of the Constitution after its suspension in 1932.” Against the
background of increasing nationalism and sectarian problems in
Syria and Lebanon, Khoury’s group became increasingly identified
with the anti-French and radical independence currents.
The Constitutional Bloc, in alliance with key rural leaders, car-
ried the 1943 elections, overcoming the Francophile opposition.
Khoury was elected President of the Republic and promptly elimi-
nated all the constitutional provisions requiring or implying sub-
mission to France. In the ensuing crisis Khoury’s wide popular

=== PDF_PAGE 158 ===
138 * ACTORS
support and British diplomatic pressure prevented the French from
removing the President and his government from office and re-
storing Edde. By the end of 1943, several factors, notably the
Anglo-French rivalry, had consolidated each of the two blocs to
such an extent that they were the poles of elite conflict for the
next nine years. They continue to be powerful factors in Lebanese
politics today, supported by factions within the banking and com-
mercial community, though in a multipolar arena they are no
longer as important as they were.*°
What kind of politicians are these bankers and lawyers? Two
examples will suggest some answers. The banker, publicist, and
political mediator Henri Pharaon (Greek Catholic) “retired” from
politics after the Khoury regime, but he remains active in the
1960s as one of the most prominent Christian leaders, even though
he is past seventy. Pharaon has long represented Lebanon’s com-
munity of high finance. Once the leader of a formidable, multi-
sectarian coalition embracing notables of North Lebanon, the Biga,
and Beirut, a broker between the Khoury machine and its enemies,
and in 1958 a leader of the Third Force, Pharaon is the epitome
of the wealthy, cultivated, and liberal Beirut politician. His view
of Lebanon reflects the thinking of Michel Chiha, his friend
and brother-in-law. He expressed it concisely in a eulogy to the
late Habib Abuchahla, an old companion and rival, in 1957:
“, . . [Nlous sommes, du fait de notre diversité méme, voués a
une politique de tolérance et de liberté, a Vintérieur, et a une
politique d’équilibre et de sagesse, 4 l’extérieur, qui sont les con-
ditions de notre sauvegarde et de notre progrés.”*! To Pharaon
political life in Lebanon is something more positive and valuable
than a state of truce between rival communities. He believes that
there is a common interest that will be served as long as the nota-
bles can get along with one another and realize that the boundaries
of acceptable behavior given in the National Pact may only be ex-
ceeded at great risk. In Pharaon’s view, serving this common in-
terest is the primary goal of politics and requires constant attention.
He believes that the common interest is never more endangered
than in the period approaching a presidential election. According
to Pharaon, no modern Lebanese president, despite his public pro-
testations to the contrary, has been willing to give up power as
the Constitution requires, and this reluctance in the cases of
Khoury and Chamoun has led to chronic conflict, which only
the most resourceful mediation by disinterested notables and out-

=== PDF_PAGE 159 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics » 139
side powers can bridge. In comparison to these chronic consti-
tutional problems, internal reforms and development are far
down the scale of Pharaon’s political priorities. The governmental
corruption of bribes and favors is infinitely preferable to military
interference in government and administration. No amount. of
social reform is worth this price, particularly if it disturbs the free-
enterprise economy. Another of Pharaon’s priorities is a foreign
policy that maintains absolute sovereignty, a requirement that can-
not be taken for granted in a country as tiny as Lebanon, situated
in a turbulent environment. Pharaon believes that one of his great-
est services to Lebanon was his intervention during the period be-
tween the signing of the Alexandria Protocol and the promulga-
tion of the Arab League Pact. His efforts resulted in the closing of
a loophole in the Protocol clause that required individual state
policy to fall within the collective approval of the Arab League.*?
Had the Protocol clause been written into the League Pact, Leb-
- anon would have faced the dilemma of choosing between violating
the spirit of the National Pact by making an open-ended commit-
ment to the Arab League or declining to join the League at all,
which would have been disastrous.** In this case, as in 1957-1958,
Lebanon’s international position was nearly compromised by her
well-meaning but misguided Western friends, England and _ the
United States. Pharaon thus also makes the classic balance-of-
power argument; and, although he is an enlightened liberal and
humanist, he prefers laissez faire to the policy planning and initia-
tive of Western polities because in Lebanon these methods in-
evitably threaten the classic equilibrium. The delicacy of the situa-
tion imposes a politics of inactivity; maintaining the balance alone
requires the full attention of the politicians. Pharaon’s view is lofty
and far removed from the vulgarities of daily politics, yet it is real-
istic insofar as it properly identifies the traditional conditions of
political stability. Whether or not it sufficiently recognizes other
conditions of stability, like those posited by the radical left, is
another matter.
The Armenian deputy Khatchik Babikian is a successful lawyer.
He is especially interesting because he represents the least integrated
of all the major religious communities and—with the possible eX:
ception of the Druzes—the most tightly knit. Perhaps this exclusive-
ness explains why Armenian leaders prefer to remain relatively in-
conspicuous politically. If this factor, as well as the fact that the
bulk of the community came to Lebanon relatively late (1920s),

=== PDF_PAGE 160 ===
140 * ACTORS
leads to a certain distance from other Christians as well as Muslims,
it is all the more reason for the Armenians to support staunchly
but quietly the sectarian status quo. As Christians Lebanon's
100,000 Armenians cannot avoid being a factor in the sectarian
equation, and their dominant party, the Tashnaq, maintains a
close liaison with the conservative Lebanese Kataeb (see p. 142).
Babikian represents Tashnaq views in the Chamber of Deputies, but
he is not a member of the party itself. Strictly an Armenian party,
the Tashnaq is probably the best organized and most disciplined
political group in Lebanon, and it dominated the politics of the
sect long before independence.** In modern Lebanon an Armenian
cannot win without Tashnaq support. Even so, the opposition of
the Henchaq Party since 1956 has been fierce, and Armenian
politics have been marked by violence and coercion. Mr. Babikian
was drawn into Armenian politics in 1956 during a crisis in the
community over an attempt by the Soviet branch of the Armenian
Gregorian Church to disestablish the Lebanese Catholics of Ar-
menian descent. The struggle immediately took on political over-
tones because the Armenian community throughout the world is
divided between those who diligently oppose the Sovietization of
Armenia (in Lebanon, they are the Tashnaq “rightists”) and those
who recognize the Soviet hegemony in Armenia and who support
socialist programs (in Lebanon, the Henchaq “leftists”).°° Babi-
kian, who had studied in Italy and Cyprus and who is one of the
few Armenians fluent in Arabic, was prevailed upon to be a
Tashnaq candidate in 1957. He felt it would be bad for Armenians
in Lebanon to be suspected of domination by a foreign church. He
won and was re-elected twice.
Babikian’s function as a community leader determines his be-
havior as a national politician. As a new constituent minority,
Armenians support the state because it gave them refuge. In Ba-
bikian’s view, the security of his community depends directly on
the security of the regime. The logic of this position explains why
Babikian supported the Chamoun regime,*® until it was clear that
it was doomed, and then became an enthusiastic supporter of the
new regime of General Chehab. In the aftermath of the 1958 crisis,
the Chehab regime was eager to recruit as many members of the
Christian community as possible in order to isolate the hard core
of opposition centered around ex-President Chamoun and Ray-
mond Edde, son of former President Emile Edde. The regime’s
interests coincided with those of the Armenians, and Babikian be-

=== PDF_PAGE 161 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 14]
came the first Armenian to hold a cabinet post.*’ Babikian and
the other three Armenians again went along with the majority in
1964 and supported the parliamentary resolution asking President
Chehab to serve a second term.
Babikian’s view of the Lebanese situation is comprehensive and
sophisticated. Representing an influential but vulnerable community,
he is compelled by the logic of the Lebanese situation to support
balance in the political system. He goes further than others, how-
ever, when he suggests that a true security and a genuine rule of
law can only come about when the apparatus of the state has the
capability to be a strong, impartial umpire in internal disputes and
to enact social reform. The Armenian community could be badly
hurt by prolonged civil disorders; thus this Armenian notable be-
lieves that working for general social improvements best serves the
parochial interests of his sect. Not only do the Armenians them-
selves stand to gain directly, for some of them inhabit the worst
slums of Beirut, but they also benefit from state policies that re-
duce the misery in non-Christian communities, insofar as such
policies promote general social and sectarian stability. This en-
lightened self-interest does not exist in some other segments of the
Christian communities. In foreign policy Babikian is obliged to be
as circumspect as Lebanon itself. Like most Christians he is un-
swerving in his support of an independent Lebanon, and as an
Armenian of the right wing, he opposes Soviet communism be-
cause he believes that it has oppressed Armenian nationalism and
that its economic philosophy is unsound. These beliefs drive him
dangerously close to the West, in a country where the West no
longer enjoys a reputation for justice and rectitude. In order to
avoid this impression, the Armenian lawyer balances his opposi-
tion to Arab unity (until each state “puts its own house in order’ )
by his approval of the social and economic reforms in the United
Arab Republic (Egypt). His role is that of the liberal honest
broker in Lebanon’s factional politics.
At the dawn of independence, the establishment was an amal-
gam of parochial clerics and landlords, with their faithful clienteles,
and the sophisticated notables with law degrees and extensive finan-
cial and social ties with Europe. The substance of normal Lebanese
politics since independence has been the rivalries within this elite.
The Constitutional Bloc and the National Bloc (to a lesser ex-
tent) lent a degree of coordination to this amalgam and _struc-
tured the rivalries in a crude way in terms of a national politics.

=== PDF_PAGE 162 ===
142 * ACTORS
The independence platform of the Constitutional Bloc imposed
enough cohesion on the fragmented power elite to carry the state
through its critical first four years.*°
The Kataeb
With one possible exception, the establishment has no parties in
the Western sense, lacking as it does secular, broadly based or-
ganizations and doctrine. Even the well-organized Tashnaq is fun-
damentally parochial. The one establishment group that most
closely approaches a Western party is the Kataeb, or the Phalanges
Libanaises. The Kataeb belongs in the establishment because it is
unambiguously committed to maintenance of the Lebanese entity.
In spite of its Maronite origins and interests, it might be called a
“party” because its programs are specific, and its organization
highly differentiated. In both programs and organization the Kataeb
has sought to broaden its original sectarian coloration.
By 1936 the pan-Syrian and pan-Arab movements were so highly
developed that, to many Maronite Christians, they threatened to
break Lebanon apart after independence. Many Maronites feared
that Lebanon might be drawn toward a Fertile Crescent scheme
by Hashemite and British interests or toward an Arab national
federation by an awakening Sunnite population, and they doubted
that the delicate machinery of the establishment could control
either tendency. On November 21, 1936, four Christians (three of
them Maronites) founded the Kataeb.*® Its mission was to preserve
and strengthen the Lebanese political entity against these strains.
The Kataeb took as its motto “Lebanon first,” although many Mus-
lims think this motto would more accurately read “Maronite Chris-
tians first.” “° It is the only clearly successful modern mass or-
ganization in the establishment.
Although the Kataeb’s goals are as conservative as those of the
National Bloc or Constitutional Bloc (Destour), its means are
hardly as traditional. A product of the radical ferment of the
1930s, it borrows heavily from the style of the European parties
of that era: salutes, uniforms, strict discipline, physical fitness,
paramilitary training. Dissatisfaction with the Mandate was a com-
mon meeting ground for all tendencies, and the Kataeb—then of-
ficially a youth group—was in the forefront of the resisters. On the
first anniversary of the founding of the Kataeb, 600 members
demonstrated in downtown Beirut, and, when the authorities tried
to disperse them, a number of people, including the Kataeb’s leader,

=== PDF_PAGE 163 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 143
Pierre Gemayel, were wounded. This incident strengthened the
movement and helped to generate a mystique around Gemayel. The
events of 1943 established the Kataeb as a significant political
force. When the French arrested the Khoury-Riad Sulh government,
the Kataeb and Najjadeh (a Muslim youth group), along with
other groups, organized the strike described earlier. This strike
and other popular activities in support of the imprisoned ministers
were important in bringing about their release.‘
In the years following independence the Kataeb has perfected its
organization. It has established relations with Lebanon’s feeble
labor movement. By 1947 the Kataeb had 40,000 members and
offices in all sections of the country, with the central organization
under the command of Gemayel. In 1949, a year of domestic un-
test, the government thwarted the Kataeb’s attempt to become a
political party. At the same time, however, it seems to have used
the Kataeb in its struggle against the Syrian National Party
(P.P.S.), which tried to foment a rebellion in the same year. The
Kataeb finally became an officially recognized party in 1952. In
the 1952 crisis the Kataeb took to the streets along with the other
groups to force the resignation of the President. Throughout the
tense period leading up to the 1958 civil war the Kataeb maintained
a vigilant stance.
During the crisis of summer 1958 the Kataeb aligned itself re-
luctantly with the forces of President Camille Chamoun, even
though it meant fighting on the same side as its old enemy, the
P.P.S. The common bond was a belief that the insurgents were an
instrument of President Nasser, the enemy of both Lebanese in-
dependence, championed by the Kataeb, and the Greater Syria
scheme, championed by the P.P.S. To the Kataeb at that time, a
greater Syria was less a threat to Lebanon than was Nasser’s Arab
unity. During most of the crisis the Kataeb’s role was minor in a
military sense, but in the “22 journées glorieuses de la contre-ré-
volution,” from September 24 to October 15, the Kataeb, inflamed
at the kidnapping of one of its journalists, spearheaded the drive
to revise the American-sponsored settlement that, to the Kataeb,
had excessively benefited the pro-Nasser insurgents. The “counter-
revolution” differed from the previous stages of the crisis in that
it bore distinct signs of religious hatreds, and the Kataeb became
involved in situations that revived its reputation as the protector
of Christians above all. The political results of the unrest were the
fall of Rashid Karami’s three-week-old cabinet, which had been

=== PDF_PAGE 164 ===
144 * ACTORS
heavily weighted with insurgents, and the creation of a four-man
emergency cabinet including Pierre Gemayel himself. With this
appointment, the Kataeb for the first time achieved a first-rank
position in the hierarchy of formal power and held it throughout
the regime of General Chehab. It held six seats in the ninety-nine-
man Parliament of 1960—more than any other single group—and
its chief was the Minister of Public Works. With its daily newspaper
and its monthly serious journal, with its many clubhouses and
cedar-tree emblems displayed in mountain villages, the Kataeb is
the only group within the establishment that can claim to be a
modern political party.
The Kataeb, however, has not yet achieved the status of a truly
national, nonsectarian organization. If it had, the level of political
institutionalization in Lebanon would be higher than it is. The
Kataeb has been speaking in mildly progressive terms since inde-
pendence. It has expounded a strong social welfare program, and it
contributed to drafting the Labor Code of 1946, one of the few
significant pieces of social legislation ever passed in Lebanon. At
the same time it has fought all efforts to weaken Lebanon’s eco-
nomic liberalism. The Kataeb has supported the rural development
program and social reform studies of the Chehab regime. It has
shown interest in resource development.* If Kataeb declarations
may be taken at face value, they are unquestionably nonsectarian
in intent. “Lebanon shall be neither church nor a mosque,” Pierre
Gemayel has said.** The party points with some pride to the fact
that it has some 2,000 Shiite members in South Lebanon and that
it has run strong parliamentary races in South Lebanon, North
Lebanon, and the Biga.** These characteristics give it more of an
appearance of a national party than do the other establishment
organizations.
These tendencies toward broad national orientation must be
evaluated, however, in the context of the core concerns of the
Kataeb. The primary concern is maintaining the Lebanese equilib-
rium. To Kataeb leaders this concern means preventing any moves
that would lead to shifts in the ratio of Christians to non-Christians
in high political positions. A constant theme of Kataeb activity is
keeping Lebanese emigrants in close touch with the homeland. The
Kataeb has helped to organize the emigrants, who are mostly Chris-
tian, in behalf of an independent and prosperous Lebanese entity
and has always insisted that if a new census is taken the overseas
Lebanese must be counted. Lebanese citizens are permitted to hold

=== PDF_PAGE 165 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics * 145
dual citizenship, but they cannot vote or hold office in Lebanon,
much to the regret of the Kataeb. The Kataeb’s position neatly
counters the demands of non-Christian elements for a new distribu-
tion of power based on the religious breakdown of the resident
population or for the granting of citizenship to the large numbers
of Arab immigrants (mostly Muslim) from Syria and Iraq. To the
Kataeb, political sectarianism is very evil but very necessary. There
are also limits to the Kataeb’s desire for social reform. To counter
demands from non-Christian socialists for significant income-re-
distribution policies, Pierre Gemayel has suggested that, because
Christians pay about 80 per cent of the taxes (his figure), they
are theoretically entitled to 80 per cent of the services. Although
the Kataeb does not advocate strict adherence to such an allocation,
Gemayel’s statement is a reminder of how the party views social
progress. Within this framework there is nevertheless unquestionably
a realization that the stability of the Lebanese entity depends in-
- creasingly on “social justice” as well as a “free economic system.”
The deeper purposes of the party are evident in its paramilitary
organization. This elaborate organization is hierarchical and is gov-
erned by democratic centralism; once the central council has decided
on a program, the party regional and sectional organizations im-
plement it without question.*? Kataeb sections are mobilized to
carry out propaganda functions, to assist with electoral campaigns,
and, if necessary, to fight. A -high party official states that the
military discipline, uniforms, parades, and training are the main
reasons for the party’s success as an organization. The paramilitary
aspect probably has even more to it, for, as one unusually fanatical
Kataeb member pointed out in reference to the 1958 crisis, the
party was the only organized form of Christian resistance. The
Kataeb leaders believe that none of the other Christian leaders are
strong enough or astute enough to provide the kind of deterrence
to the non-Christian movements that may threaten; indeed, some
of their harshest criticism has been directed at Camille Chamoun,
Raymond Edde, and the Maronite Patriarch. Opinions differ as to
the effectiveness of the Kataeb “policemen” in 1958, but it is gen-
erally agreed that they brought coercive pressure to bear against
the pro-Nasser insurgents. During the “22 journées glorieuses”
Kataeb section members carried out kidnappings and murders in
Beirut with a ferocity at least equal to that of the insurgents, and
in South Lebanon they claim that they held off a 6,000-man Syrian
force with their 1,000 riflemen.*®

=== PDF_PAGE 166 ===
146 * ACTORS
At the same time they work diligently and sincerely to promote
Lebanese nationalism, the Kataeb is thus also a guardian of Chris-
tian interests, and it makes little secret of its coercive power even
though it continues to press for social development. As long as
“Lebanon first” continues to be interpreted by Muslims as “Chris-
tians first,” however, the Kataeb will not become an integrating na-
tional party.
The Establishment in the 1960s
After two decades of independence the notables who govern
Lebanon command a political system that is still most responsive to
considerations of family, sect, and wealth, but it is by no means as
isolated as that description suggests. Since the early 1950s organiza-
tions within the establishment have proliferated. The Hayat al-
Watania (National Committee), which is composed of Sunnite
businessmen and lawyers, has applied pressure for a sectarian al-
location of positions more favorable to Muslims. Former Presi-
dent Camille Chamoun has organized the National Liberal Party
(N.L.P.), which is largely composed of his friends and clients,*”
and some of the younger notables like Kamel al-Assaad and
Rashid Karami have tried, though with little apparent success, to
establish organizations distinct from their traditional power base.
The Kataeb, which began as a militant Christian youth group, has
left the streets and entered the establishment. The notables of busi-
ness, commerce, and finance have developed interest groups. They
have also cultivated journalistic outlets that compensate significantly
for the lack of party organizations. The proprietors of the major
establishment papers, like al-Nahar, al-Hayat, L’Orient, and _al-
Safa, expose the elite to sophisticated conservatism and force it to
confront the issues of the day. The establishment’s traditional foun-
dations continue to provide many points of access for individuals.
Every head of a major family, every parliamentary deputy, and
every notable with influence has important direct contacts with his
local circle of relatives and friends. Such contacts keep members
of the elite in touch with popular feelings.
The establishment is also remarkably homogeneous and well in-
tegrated, compared with the general population. One need only
follow the social columns, the marriage announcements, and the in-
exhaustible stream of society photographs that appear weekly in the

=== PDF_PAGE 167 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 147
Revue du Liban to be convinced that the contacts among the elite
are numerous and usually harmonious. Beirut’s huge diplomatic
community only multiplies the necessities and opportunities for
intra-elite contact, and more than one ambassador has complained
of the arduous “night shift.” Not only do the notables and their
entourages meet constantly, but they also share the same back-
grounds; they have been educated in Europe and have been exposed
to the sophistication of a most cosmopolitan environment. A uni-
versity professor can call up his friend in the General Security De-
partment and ask a favor; the special adviser to the President is
well acquainted with the high official in the Finance Ministry; the
deputy from Byblos lunches with his journalist friends at the private
beach of the St. Georges hotel; a notable from Zagharta invites
twenty-five fellow notables from all over the country for an outdoor
banquet; a distinguished banker assembles seventy-five distinguished
men, each of whom he knows well, and issues an important policy
- declaration. In the higher realms of the establishment cohesion is
limited neither by sectarian nor—under most circumstances—par-
tisan cleavages. Even the ubiquitous personal rivalries are normally
muffied in the establishment ambiance.
Behind the ambiance is a tacit understanding of Lebanon’s in-
security. Notables whose political orientations are diametrically op-
posed share an awareness of the fragility of the Lebanese political
situation and of the new social and international forces that chal-
lenge it. At the popular level, it is hard to observe any positive
Lebanese consensus, but within the establishment there is most
definitely a common code of political conduct. This code does not
resemble that of the Marquis of Queensberry, and it certainly does
not prohibit, or inhibit, rivalries. Conflict at the personal level is
expected and widely tolerated. Personal rivalries occasionally lead
to physical violence, but it is rare indeed that any member of the
establishment exploits confessional suspicions or latent hatreds for
political advantage. The rare exceptions, of course, like the 1958
crisis, can be disastrous. In general, however, the establishment con-
sensus has quite successfully limited the behavior even of notables
whose personal commitment to the National Pact is questionable.
These, then, are the elements of the Lebanese establishment:
religious dignitaries, great families, bankers, lawyers, and business-
men. Together they constitute a fragmented amalgam of special
interests. How do they operate politically?

=== PDF_PAGE 168 ===
148 * ACTORS
CHANGING FACTIONAL PATTERNS
Factionalism is the dominant characteristic of Lebanese establish-
ment politics. Lebanese commentators often describe their factional-
ism as an endless game of musical chairs, in which notables compete
incessantly for power and prestige. Because factional loyalties are so
impermanent, they provide for a widespread sharing of power within
the establishment. The fluidity of factional loyalties also presents some
obvious drawbacks to political system performance. The evils cata-
logued in The Federalist, Number 10, are all too familiar to the
Lebanese citizen:
A zeal for different opinions concerning religion, concerning government,
and many other points, as well of speculation as of practice; an
attachment to different leaders ambitiously contending for pre-emi-
nence and power; or to persons of other descriptions whose fortunes
have been interesting to the human passions, have, in turn, divided
mankind into parties, inflamed them with mutual animosity, and
rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other
than to co-operate for their common good.
Whatever faction the Lebanese citizen sides with, he will, in re-
flective moments, agree that the public interest is poorly served. An
examination of factional patterns over time will afford a clearer
idea of their advantages and drawbacks.
The Khoury Regime (1943-1952)
The Khoury regime manipulated factions to maintain itself in
power, but factionalism also encouraged the corruption, ineffi-
ciency, and authoritarian measures that led to its downfall in 1952.
Indeed, corruption associated with the 1947 elections generated
a public cynicism toward politicians and institutions alike that re-
mained long after the regime had disappeared.
Bechara al-Khoury, the master builder of the Republic, used
factionalism to solidify the forces that had won independence into
a political machine. He created a national machine made up of
bosses who could control the whole country through traditional af-
filiations. The shabby climax of the Khoury regime has tended to
diminish the magnitude of this accomplishment. Without a firm
power base, it is doubtful that Lebanon could have survived the

=== PDF_PAGE 169 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 149
first years of its formal independence. Those years were marked by
the need to remove the French (the last French soldiers were not
recalled until the end of 1946), to solve the food shortage and
hard-currency problems, to establish Lebanon’s independent exis-
tence before the United Nations and the Arab states, and above all
to maintain sectarian peace and political control.
A study of the electoral lists in the 1943, 1947, and 1951 elec-
tions shows that Khoury molded his alliance of regional bosses and
Beirut businessmen by establishing alliances with a few key nota-
bles: Riad Sulh, Henri Pharaon, Majid Arslan, Ahmad al-Assaad.
These political brokers in turn harnessed their own diverse clien-
teles to the regime and gave it sufficient strength, through manipula-
tion of patronage and electoral lists, to keep the opposition notables
divided. This process was particularly clear in the three outlying
regions. In the Biqa, the machine was headed by Henri Pharaon, the
Beirut banker, and Sabri Hamadeh, a member of the area’s dominant
~ Shiite family, who were comrades in arms in the struggle with the
French. It won virtually without opposition in 1947 and 1951.
Pharaon’s influence, however, extended far beyond the Biga. In
Beirut, he wielded considerable influence through his ties with
Christian banking circles. In North Lebanon, he was a close friend
of the political boss of Tripoli, Abdel-Hamid Karami, who later
became one of the important opposition leaders under the Khoury
regime. Pharaon’s mediating talent kept this important leader
within the regime fold until 1947, but by that time Pharaon himself
was beginning to back off from an increasingly corrupt Destour
(Constitutional Bloc).
Khoury, however, sought continually to broaden his base of sup-
port among the notables, shrewdly realizing that dependence on
just one or two would quickly bring all the others into a superior
coalition against him. The President controlled an overwhelming
power bloc in North Lebanon, including not only Abdel-Hamid
Karami but also members of the other great families of the area—
the al-Ali, Abboud, Frangieh, Muqaddam, and Jisr families. When
Abdel-Hamid Karami ultimately defected, the regime still had a
strong position. In this region, as in the others, Khoury exploited
family rivalries to the regime’s advantage. In South Lebanon,
Ahmad al-Assaad was the pre-eminent Shiite. Assaad had cooper-
ated with Beirut under the French and continued to do so under
Khoury. South Lebanon also provided the electoral base for Riad
Sulh, Lebanon’s foremost Arab nationalist and cosigner of the

=== PDF_PAGE 170 ===
150 * ACTORS
National Pact. Riad Sulh held the bulk of the Sunnites in his
charismatic sway. Riad Sulh, however, was not popular with the
Sunnite leaders of Beirut, who held tight control over their dis-
tricts through a highly organized system of neighborhood strong
men. The regime as a whole was not fond of the Sunnite leaders
in Beirut either. Once independence had been achieved, it consis-
tently sought outside Beirut for Sunnite leaders to fill the post of
Prime Minister. In Beirut, the regime derived its support instead
from mostly non-Maronite Christian trade and finance groups. The
Armenian community provided faithful support, as it always does
for the regime in power, whereas the Greek Orthodox elite, repre-
sented by Habib Abuchahla, supplied funds and influence. The
regime found Mount Lebanon the most difficult area to control
because the proliferation of independent groupings was so great.
Among the Druzes Khoury maintained a firm alliance with Amir
Majid Arslan, another leader of the independence movement, whose
leadership over the Yazbaki Druzes was particularly useful because
Kamal Jumblat, the leader of the other Druze faction, proved to be
too much for the regime to handle. In the nineteenth century the
Jumblat family had favored. the British; under the Mandate, Kamal’s
mother, Sitt Nazira Jumblat, was a formidable ally of the French.
Kamal had thus been brought up in an atmosphere favorable to the
party of Emile Edde, the rival of Bechara al-Khoury, but, like
most of the other notables, joined Khoury’s group in order to
struggle for independence. Once independence was achieved, how-
ever, Kamal Jumblat began to raise trouble for the regime as a
reformer; instead of being silenced with the ministerial portfolios
of National Economy and Agriculture in 1946, he turned upon
the regime, attacking it for its numerous faults. Among the Chris-
tians of Mount Lebanon the regime found its most consistently
strong opposition. Emile Edde and his colleagues in the National
Bloc worked diligently to undermine the regime’s support among
the Maronites and were aided in their efforts by the Patriarch him-
self and numerous lesser clerics. Still, the President’s family was
eminent, and it was related through marriage and finance to power-
ful notables of the Greek Catholic community like Philippe Taqla,
Michel Chiha, and Henri Pharaon.
Scarcely had the French released the government from the
Rachaya prison on November 22, 1943, when Khoury’s grand
coalition began to crumble. In South Lebanon the single campaign
list of Khoury supporters in 1943, comprised of Ahmad al-Assaad,

=== PDF_PAGE 171 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics «+ 15]
Adel Osseiran, Yussef Salem, and Kazem Khalil, among others,
had collapsed by the time of the next election in 1947, when the
last three organized their own list and put up a close but losing
struggle. Riad Sulh was the Sunnite candidate on both lists. In
Mount Lebanon there were two “official” lists, owing to the grow-
ing rivalries within the old Constitutional Bloc. On one list were
five incumbent ministers, all of them popular in their own right and
all necessary for the stability of the machine. But two of the five
—Kamal Jumblat and Camille Chamoun—had ambitions of their
own. After they had obtained a place on the “official” list for
Mount Lebanon, they insisted that the President’s brother, Shaykh
Selim al-Khoury—the President’s hatchet man of unsavory reputa-
tion—be dropped from the list along with a number of other old
Destourians. The President agreed, reluctantly (he writes), and
Shaykh Selim was forced to organize his own list in semiopposition.
Of this “neo-Destour” list, only Shaykh Selim and one other candi-
- date won.** President Khoury wrote that he regretted the maneuver;
and well he might have, for after the election Jumblat and Chamoun
charged him with corruption and seriously began to engineer his
downfall.
The opposition National Bloc list polled 20 per cent of the vote.
In Beirut the government successfully thwarted a rising current of
opposition by assembling a list headed by three top Sunnite leaders,
Abdallah Yafi, Sami Sulh, and Hussein Oueini. It won with 88
per cent of the vote, but the easy victory only fed the fires of dis-
content, and the losers—backed by an influential segment of the
press—denounced the government’s steamroller tactics. The de-
fection of Abdel-Hamid Karami in Tripoli weakened the regime’s
position there, but it minimized its losses by building a coalition of
other great families, including rivals of Karami; and this coalition
polled approximately 95.7 per cent of the vote. Only in the Biqa
was the old Khoury coalition unopposed, but even there a quarrel
between Henri Pharaon and Sabri Hamadeh, in which the latter
briefly joined with another wealthy Greek Catholic, Joseph Skaf,
threatened to raise difficulties until President Khoury arranged to
run Joseph Skaf from South Lebanon.”
Despite growing problems within his coalition, President Khoury’s
choices won without exception, and he had no difficulty whatever
persuading Parliament to amend the National Pact and then to vote
him a second term the following year. The Khoury regime actually
was undermined by its erstwhile stalwarts and not by the formal

=== PDF_PAGE 172 ===
152 * ACTORS
opposition. This was certainly clear by 1951. The preceding years
had been hard: The wartime boom had petered out, the customs
union with Syria had collapsed, the Palestine tragedy had loaded
the government with human as well as political burdens, and the
abortive P.P.S. rebellion of 1949, which received initial support
from the new Syrian government of Colonel Husni Zaim, had
shaken the country’s security. A highly articulate opposition had
arisen: The agitation of youth groups and new political parties
had effectively disintegrated the postindependence consensus. The
regime had reacted by closing down newspapers and banning
political activity by the youth groups. The Khoury machine tried
to recoup its fortunes by increasing the number of seats in Parlia-
ment from fifty-five to seventy-seven and by isolating the opposition,
which was strongest in Mount Lebanon, through redistricting. The
elections in the rural provinces showed less change than in Beirut
and Mount Lebanon. There was, however, a tendency toward in-
creased competition. In North Lebanon, the old single district was
now three, and in two of the new districts there was a bifactional
struggle. Rashid Karami’s list in Tripoli won with two-thirds of the
total vote; the al-Ali list beat the Abboud list in Akkar by a similar
margin. A trifactional feudal struggle took place in Christian
Zagharta-Batroun. South Lebanon experienced another struggle be-
tween the Assaad and the Osseiran machines, and in the Biqa, a
Pharaon-backed Hamadeh list won over a list headed by Joseph
Skaf but by a much narrower margin than in its previous victories.
In Beirut, the “grand list” organized by Henri Pharaon, which
included stalwarts like Habib Abuchahla, Moses Derkaloustian (the
perennial Armenian Tashnaq representative); Amine Beyham, of
a distinguished Sunnite family; Charles Helou, who was close to
the Catholic “aristocracy”; and Pharaon’s relative Moussa de Freige
won easily over an opposition headed by Muhieddine Nsouli. The
Pharaon list received two-thirds of the total vote. The situation,
however, was not as secure as the victory might indicate. The lead-
ing Sunnites on the grand list—Sami Sulh, Saeb Salam, and Abdallah
Yafi—operated from invulnerable power positions and, as indicated
earlier, had reason to be unhappy with a regime that had given
Riad Sulh the prime ministership in four successive governments
lasting three years altogether. There were other ominous signs:
Nassim Majdalani ran ahead of the next-highest opposition candidate
by about 3,700 votes and nearly unseated Abuchahla for the Greek
Orthodox seat. Majdalani, though a banker, was also affiliated

=== PDF_PAGE 173 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 153
with the rising opposition. The communist leader, Mustafa Ariss,
polled 5,500 votes, which was far behind the 12,000 votes that
the lowest Sunnite winners polled but enough to show real strength.
In Mount Lebanon, 1951 found the Khoury supporters weaker
than they had ever been, holding about fifteen of the twenty-three
seats in the three districts of Metn, Chouf, and Kisrwan. Their
_ share of the total vote in each district was 45.5, 48.7, and 51.8
respectively. In Metn, they carried only five of a nine-man list
and were unable to prevent the election of Pierre Edde, a son of
Khoury’s deceased rival, in a runoff election.®° The loss in the
Chouf was to prove ultimately fatal. Out of nine seats the Destour
list won only four, and the opposing list headed by Kamal Jumblat
polled 49.6 per cent of the vote, winning the remaining five seats.
The Jumblat group was called the Socialist National Front
(S.N.F.), although its primary unifying doctrine was not socialism
but governmental reform. Its five winning members were Kamal
Jumblat; Camille Chamoun; Emile Bustani, a self-made millionaire
contractor; Ghassan Tueni, a young Orthodox, Harvard-educated
editor, who enjoyed the support of the P.P.S.; and Anwar Khatib, a
jurist and intellectual ally of Jumblat. In September 1952, in the
wake of the Egyptian revolution and despite some last-minute reform
proposals from President Khoury, the S.N.F. spearheaded the opposi-
tion movement that forced the President to resign.
The night President Khoury gave up his mandate (it had two
years to run) nearly sixty members of the seventy-seven-man Par-
liament came to his house in Aley in a futile gesture of support.”
Clearly, the Parliament was not representative of forces in the coun-
try, and the government was incapable of governing even though
its legal mandate was unquestionable. A handful of opposition depu-
ties had rallied a collection of interests, new and old, legal and illegal,
and brought down a regime with a short general strike. The fac-
tional situation had permitted the regime to consolidate both itself
and the state at the cost of excluding a great many elements and
failing to provide a framework for legitimate opposition activity.
The Chamoun Regime (1952-1958)
President Camille Chamoun is not remembered for his progres-
sive or reformist ideas, perhaps because of his position in the 1958
crisis; yet he attempted to make important structural innovations,
particularly in curbing the powers of the rural political bosses. In-

=== PDF_PAGE 174 ===
154 * ACTORS
stead of exploiting traditional pluralism as had his predecessor, Pres-
ident Chamoun sought to undermine it. During the Khoury regime
factional divisions were relatively simple and shallow; under the
Chamoun presidency, they became chaotic and deep. Both Khoury
and Chamoun shared the same basic interest—consolidating and
expanding the power of the President—but the circumstances under
which Chamoun came to power forced him to adopt more radical
measures. Chamoun was propelled to power by a temporary co-
alition of establishment forces, impatient with their long exclusion
from power, and forces outside the establishment that had been
mobilized by a band of reformist middle-class intellectuals. The
1952 crisis marks the first time that these outside forces had sig-
nificantly penetrated the traditional system, and the resulting fac-
tional disequilibrium left the new President in an awkward position.
He had inherited the enmity of the important notables who had
worked with the deposed President. The traditionalists in his own
coalition wanted to compete with him for power and spoils rather
than to support him; and the radicals of the Socialist National
Front, encouraged and perhaps surprised at having drawn blood so
easily, sought to implement sweeping reform programs. Furthermore,
there was an external problem that soon multiplied his local dif-
ficulties: the convergence of radical Arab nationalism and Cold
War pressures upon Lebanon. It is hardly surprising, therefore,
that Chamoun set out immediately to strengthen his power by in-
tervening in the electoral process.
The 1952 election law was aimed at breaking the power of rural
feudal elements. In the 1953 elections, the rural areas (North Leb-
anon, South Lebanon, and the Biqa) showed a higher degree of
competition, largely because they were no longer simple districts:
North Lebanon now consisted of eight districts, South Lebanon
seven, and the Biga four. The landlords as a group remained firmly
entrenched. In North Lebanon five of the seven winners in single-
member contests received 59 per cent of the total vote or less, but
the faces were still the same and dominated by the Sunnite leader
of Tripoli, Rashid Karami, and the Maronite from Zagharta, Hamid
Frangieh. In Akkar the family feud between Sleiman al-Ali and
Muhammad Abboud resulted in the assassination of the latter during
the campaign.” In Tripoli city Rashid Karami narrowly defeated
a “popular” candidate, Muhammad Hamzeh, and in Tripoli district
a pro-Soviet leftist, Hashem Husseini, was elected. In Zagharta and
Batroun the local bosses, Frangieh and Jean Harb, won seats. The

=== PDF_PAGE 175 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 155
Greek Orthodox seat in Koura went to its leading family, the
Ghusns, but the nearest rival was the P.P.S. leader Abdallah
Saadeh. The big families continued to rule the South, but the scope
of Ahmad al-Assaad’s power was greatly curbed, permitting rep-
resentation from the Osseiran and Khalil families for the first time
in a decade. Although al-Assaad had his son Kamel elected from
Merjayoun, the father for the first time faced a serious rival in
Ali Bazzi, then a member of a moderate Arab nationalist party,
Nida al-Qawmi, in Bint Jbeil. In the Biga Sabri Hamadeh survived
the fall of the Destour by a bare 757 votes, and other notables
who had been poorly treated by the Destour, like Georges Hraoui
and Joseph Skaf, did well.
The new President was able, however, to weaken both his tradi-
tion-based and his progressive opponents in Mount Lebanon and
Beirut. In Mount Lebanon, the National Bloc did better than it
ever had since 1943 by seating Raymond Edde, Pierre Edde, and
Georges Akl, and notables friendly to the National Bloc such as
Clovis al-Khazen, Gabriel Murr, Maurice Zouein. On the other
hand, the old Destourians like Wadih Naim, Bahige Takieddine,
Georges Karam, Edmond Noun, and Louis Ziadeh, were defeated;
only Emile Lahoud and Majid Arslan, now independent in name
as well as in fact, were returned from the original Constitutional
Bloc caucus.
What happened to the new elements that had formed a coalition
in the Chouf two years earlier? They had already begun to splinter.
Once the objective of bringing down one President had been
achieved, Kamal Jumblat soon found himself at odds with Khoury’s
successor. President Chamoun would not support Jumblat’s propos-
als for land reform and nationalization of businesses. Furthermore,
the nonsocialist reformists who had formed the old S.N.F., Ghassan
Tueni and Emile Bustani, were not interested in further changing
the political structure. Jumblat was put on the defensive when the
new President called for new elections. Because of the redistricting,
he squeaked through with a margin of only 613 votes,” and his
Progressive Socialist Party (P.S.P.) colleague Anwar Khatib lost
to the list of Emile Bustani. In Beirut another old member of the
S.N.F., Ghassan Tueni, barely edged out Nassim Majdalani, Jum-
blat’s associate in the anti-West, neutralist P.S.P. Tueni, who at
the time was still associated with the P.P.S. (Parti Populaire Syrien,
the party that advocated a Greater Syria) was running with the
former President of Lebanon and a staunch independent, Alfred

=== PDF_PAGE 176 ===
156 * ACTORS
Naccache; and Majdalani was running with a member of the Kataeb,
which had a pro-Western, Maronite, nonsocialist posture.* Such
mixed tickets indicated the irrationalities of the 1953 election. The
various elements of the opposition to President Khoury—Jumblat,
P.S.P., S.N.F., P.P.S., National Bloc, Sunnite leaders, Kataeb—were
too particularistic to band together in a strong national party, al-
though there were a few attempts.” President Chamoun had failed to
build a positive, rationalized presidential party, but he had suc-
ceeded in dividing his opponents.
By 1957 international politics had provided the domestic po-
litical scene with an organization that local initiatives had failed
to give. Lebanon’s political life was becoming polarized between
supporters and opponents of President Chamoun and his increasingly
close relationship with the United States. The crises of 1956 and
1957 in Egypt, Jordan, and Syria had magnified the sectarian
problem as well: Strong support of President Nasser among Sun-
nite Muslims made Christians, especially the Maronites, apprehen-
sive. President Chamoun had also made a number of enemies
since 1952, particularly among some important non-Christian no-
tables, whose political power Chamoun had sought.to curb in his
electoral reform and his administrative appointments. The elections
of 1957 partly reflected this polarization. Following in his predeces-
sor’s footsteps, President Chamoun enlarged the parliamentary
membership by twenty-one seats and proceeded by all the means at
his disposal to fill all the seats with his supporters. The situation in
North Lebanon and the Biqa remained relatively stable: The regime
could not unseat notables as well established as Rashid Karami,
Hamid Frangieh, and Sabri Hamadeh. It did, however, go to
unusual lengths to ensure that Foreign Minister Charles Malik run
virtually unopposed for the Greek Orthodox seat in Koura. In other
areas, however, key leaders of the Opposition to Chamoun were
defeated. In Beirut Saeb Salam and Abdallah Yafi, who had re-
signed in protest against the regime’s handling of the Suez crisis,
were defeated by Chamoun-backed newcomers. The regime list,
headed by Sami Sulh, received only 51 per cent of the vote, but
that was sufficient because the remainder of the vote was split between
the Salam-Yafi list (40.5 per cent) and miscellaneous individuals.
In the Chouf Kamal Jumblat lost to a regime-sponsored newcomer
and charged that his traditional area had been gerrymandered by
a regime working hand in glove with American imperialists.**

=== PDF_PAGE 177 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics » 157
Personal rivalries as well as foreign policy undoubtedly contributed
to Jumblat’s defeat, but, whatever the causes, the result was to force
Jumblat to resort to extralegal politics. Even the “Seigneur of
Taybeh,” Ahmad al-Assaad, lost to a lesser rival, Kazem Khalil.
His only consolation was that his son Kamel narrowly edged out a
regime candidate in Merjayoun. Of Beirut’s eleven deputies, ten
_ were allies or clients of President Chamoun, and eighteen of the
twenty Mount Lebanon deputies supported him. The opposition to
Chamoun was stronger in the traditional and rural areas: In the
Biqa four of ten elected were opposition candidates; in South
Lebanon five of eleven; and in North Lebanon six of fourteen.
A full year before the civil war the geographic lines of the con-
flict were thus reasonably clear in the geographical origins of
the minuscule opposition in Parliament, just as the political lines
were already drawn. The regime held the core Beirut-Mount Leb-
anon area—with certain prominent exceptions—whereas real power
in the outlying regions remained in the hands of the traditional
leaders.
Any evaluation of factionalism during the Chamoun regime must
take account of the deepening rift between Arab nationalists and
Lebanese independents; between the prosperous and the backward
areas; and between Maronites and Sunnites. Equally important,
however, is the narrow political struggle between a President try-
ing to enhance his effective power and rural notables trying to
maintain their political influence. President Chamoun used fac-
tionalism vigorously to divide his enemies and to build a super-
ficially strong support base. At the same time, however, factionalism
prevented him from recruiting enough new sources of support.
President Chamoun badly needed a strong party, but all he had
was a bickering, divided, and relatively weak coalition. In the
case of the important opposition leaders, the President’s refusal
to play the factional game drove them to insurrection because the
numerical balance in the Chamber did not reflect the intensity of
the opposition. From early 1957 the opposition notables regarded
the electoral and parliamentary institutions as illegitimate, and the
President did not possess a sufficiently positive backing of his own
to make a convincing case that they were wrong. On the surface
the institutions seemed to be functioning normally: The President
had a substantial majority and a vocal opposition group remained
in Parliament.

=== PDF_PAGE 178 ===
158 * ACTORS
The Chehab Regime (1958-1964)
General Fuad Chehab, whose low regard for politicians is well
known, made it clear that traditional factionalism must not stand
in the way of executive action. He found, however, that factionalism
is inevitable in a polity that is fragmented and lacking in rationalized
structures. After he reached this conclusion, he tried to circumvent
the old pluralism and begin anew by building up his own power
base (see Chapter 8). In this effort, General Chehab had certain
advantages. Not only did nearly everybody consider him a savior
from the horrors of 1958, but he also had the support of many
of the newer intelligentsia in the professions and the military.
Instead of fighting the old factions, General Chehab left them
alone, perhaps on the assumption that they were less harmful when
visible. The 1960 Parliament (with an increased total of ninety-nine
seats) was somewhat more broadly representative than its predeces-
sors. It included nearly all the factions that had been fighting two
years earlier. The Kataeb list was propelled to victory in Beirut’s
all-Christian first district by what one journalist called the “im-
placable efficiency” of its machine, and it won with more than two-
thirds of the total vote. The list of the National Bloc, headed by
Pierre Edde, could not hope to match this kind of organization be-
cause it had never been organized as a cadre party. In the election
of 1964, the Kataeb list ran unopposed in the same district. Saeb
Salam and Nassim Majdalani, along with other stalwarts of the
one-time insurgents, won in the classic traditional style in the nearly
all-Sunnite third district. In Beirut’s second district, an interesting
struggle brought victory to a list of radicals headed by Adnan
Hakim, chief of the Najjadeh, the Sunnite pan-Islamic party. Mohsen
Slim, a well-known Shiite liberal, and Farid Jibran, representing
Jumblat’s P.S.P., won on the same list. This combination swamped
a group from the older generation, including Rashid Beydoun,
Moussa de Freige, and Takieddine Sulh. Sami Sulh, his power broken
by the outcome of the 1958 crisis, ran alone and received only
half as many votes as the winning Sunnite, Adnan Hakim. If this
election indicated a breakthrough to the left, the returns four years
later showed that sectarian insecurities and personal charm were still
effective in Beirut’s second district: Hakim was narrowly edged out
by “Papa” Sami Sulh, whose votes were mostly delivered by the
Christians in the district, and Beydoun, another old establishment
figure, beat Slim. Of the 1960 winning trio, only Jibran survived,

=== PDF_PAGE 179 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 159
and his survival was attributed to the fact that his association with
Jumblat delivered the Druze vote.
In Mount Lebanon, too, both the loyalists and the insurgents of
1958 won in 1960. On the old loyalist side there was evidence of
more cooperation among groups than there had been. In Baabda,
for example, a list made up of members of the National Bloc, the
Kataeb, and Camille Chamoun’s new party, the National Liberals,
did well against the newly resuscitated Constitutional Bloc (now
called the “Constitutional Union Bloc”). In Metn former President
Chamoun and a member of his list won, as did three members of
the opposing list; all leaned to the old loyalist side. In Chouf the
Jumblat-P.S.P. list won six of eight seats, whereas of the opposing
list supported by President Chamoun only the redoubtable Emile
Bustani and a Sunnite, Qablan Qablan, survived. In Aley it was, as
always, Amir Majid’s list that triumphed, carrying with it Khalil
al-Khoury, a son of former President Khoury, who was the nominal
head of the Constitutional Union Bloc; but this time the opposition
vote was divided between a P.S.P. list and a collection of strong in-
dependents. In 1964 a reshuffling of this opposition was still not
enough to disturb the Amir’s position. In Kisrwan and Jbeil, the
almost exclusively Maronite districts, men allied or friendly with
the National Bloc beat lists affiliated with the Destour in 1960,
perpetuating the most constant cleavage in Lebanese politics. Four
years later Raymond Edde, the head of the National Bloc, was, to
the surprise of many, defeated in his home territory of Jbeil: The
defeat resulted in part from a shift in the family alliances of the
region, but there was also the familiar specter of interference from
the regime, this time in military dress. Following the death of
Edde’s opponent in 1965 a special election was held in which Edde
regained his seat, but not without confronting a group of traditional
enemies and, behind the scenes, agents of the army security forces.
The latter had never forgiven Edde’s outspoken attacks on the army
for its alleged interference in politics after 1958.
In the rural provinces too, nearly everyone who had any influence
found a place in the biggest Lebanese Parliament ever, but there were
certainly fewer Chamounians in 1960 than before. Maarouf Saad,
virtual ruler of Saida during the 1958 disturbances, won again from
that town. Elsewhere in South Lebanon the influence of Ahmad
al-Assaad was restored almost to its former brilliance. It was
marred only by the defeat of his son Kamel at the hands of an Arab
nationalist, Ali Bazzi. Bazzi, it might be added, had been Interior

=== PDF_PAGE 180 ===
160 * ACTORS
Minister before the election. When the elder Assaad died, however,
his son completed his term and won again in 1964 to extend even
further the family’s influence. The same leaders continued to repre-
sent North Lebanon: Rashid Karami, Sleiman al-Ali, Sleiman
Frangieh, Fuad Ghusn, Philippe Boulos, Jean Harb, and René
Moawad. The style of campaigning was typically rough. Certainly
the most notable regional event in the 1960 election was the very
strong performance of a member of the Baath Party, Abdul-Majid
Rifahi, whose 14,000 votes came within 800 votes of the lowest
man on Rashid Karami’s list. In the Biga Joseph Skaf’s list de-
feated the list of his Phalangist cousin in Zahleh, and the Jumblatist
Druze, Chebli al-Aryan, won in Rachaya. In the Baalbek-Hermel
district a trend toward tribal multifactionalism developed in connec-
tion with an observed decline in the traditional feudal spirit. The
power of Sabri Hamadeh, the old boss of the Hermel, a member of
every national legislative body since 1925 and a member of the
brief resistance movement of 1943, was weakening. In 1953 he had
carried his reduced district in Hermel by a mere 757 votes, a far
cry from 1947 when he received 29,500 and was unopposed, or even
1951, when his list won with a comfortable margin of nearly 6,000.
His margin in 1957 (just over 4,000 votes) was better, but it was
based less on his feudal position than on his membership in the
opposition to President Chamoun. In 1960 his margin again fell
to about 1,300, and his position was challenged by a new crop of
Shiite notables with both tribal support and new faces.°’ In 1964
Hamadeh was the only Shiite of his list who won in a battle con-
tested among four strong lists.
The members of the 1960 Parliament represented some fourteen
parties and groupings (by most generous count).°* There were the
cliques of the traditional leaders: Sabri Hamadeh, Joseph Skaf,
Sleiman Frangieh, Sleiman al-Ali, Rashid Karami, Ahmad al-Assaad,
and Majid Arslan. There were the caucuses: the National Bloc (six
deputies); the Constitutional Union Party, the former Destour (six
deputies), and the Sunnite Hay’at al-Watania (one deputy). Among
the more or less organized political parties, the Kataeb had six
members, Jumblat’s Progressive Socialist Party had ten (counting its
list allies), President Chamoun’s National Liberals had six, the
Armenian Tashnaq had four, and the Najjadeh had one. In general
outlines the 1964 Parliament was the same, although the Najjadeh
and Hay’at al-Watania representation had disappeared, and represen-
tation of the Kataeb and National Bloc had diminished. If any-

=== PDF_PAGE 181 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 161
thing, the traditional organizational forms were reasserting their
strong dominance on the parliamentary scene. The only significant
change was the defeat of the two most prominent Christian leaders,
Raymond Edde and Camille Chamoun, under somewhat suspicious
circumstances. These defeats may well have been decisive factors
in preventing the renewal of General Chehab’s mandate in the
- summer of 1964.
The old factionalism had been renewed after the anarchy of the
1958 crisis: To all outward appearances the game of musical chairs
was being played in much the same manner as it had been played
during the two previous regimes. Although General Chehab found
much to criticize in the process, he undoubtedly realized its value
in the management of Lebanon’s parochial tensions. Instead of
attempting to abolish the game altogether, he thus appeared to en-
courage it in order to restore political normality and confidence. Not
only were more factions represented in the Chehab Parliaments, but
also the major leaders of all tolerated tendencies were included
in the enlarged Cabinets.
There was, however, an important difference in the factional
politics of the establishment after 1958. Factionalism was no longer
the exclusive process by which power was allocated. Although he
seemed to tolerate the old politics and even to encourage it, Presi-
dent Chehab was a!so trying to develop processes that would sustain
the reforms of the state that he felt were necessary for Lebanon’s
future stability. This attempt is described in Chapter 8. Many es-
tablishment politicians, both Christian and Muslim, complained that
the Chehab regime had tried to deprive them of influence and to
reduce factional politics to a hollow ritual at the same time that the
important state decisions were actually being made by a group of
military men and technocrats. Their complaint was well grounded.
Establishment factionalism, however, is deeply rooted in the Lebanese
political culture; and events after the end of the Chehab regime in
1964 revived it, with all its virtues and defects, as the predominant
decision-making process.
The Lebanese establishment shows considerable capabilities in the
management of traditional types of conflict, and it has developed the
ability to regulate its own internal rivalries. It has performed less
adequately, however, in dealing with the chronic and increasing
stresses arising from forces outside its scope of influence. These stresses
support a counterelite whose orientations and perspectives challenge
the Lebanese system. Chapter 5 discusses these “outsiders.”

=== PDF_PAGE 182 ===
162 * ACTORS
NOTES
1 Perhaps the story is apocryphal. Doctor Van Zeeland did advise the gov-
ernment to develop the productive sectors in order to avoid excessive reliance
on the vagaries of commerce. L’Orient, April 25, 1947.
2 Malcolm H. Kerr, Lebanon in the Last Years of Feudalism (Beirut: Ameri-
can University, 1959), pp. 22-5.
3 U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States: Paris
Peace Conference, 1919, XII (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1947), 745-863, especially 759-60, 774-7, 848-63. See also Harry N.
Howard, The King-Crane Commission (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1963), pp. 125-35;
and the William Yale papers, Yale University Library, New Haven.
4Zeine N. Zeine, The Struggle for Arab Independence (Beirut: Khayat’s,
1960), pp. 37-8, 143-5, 263-4.
5 General Georges Catroux, Deux Missions en Moyen-Orient, 1919-1922
(Paris: Plon, 1958), pp. 68-83; Iskandar Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d [Before and
After] (Beirut: Maktabat al-‘arfan, 1953), pp. 44-6; and Riachi, Rw’usd’ lubnan
kama araftuhum [Presidents of Lebanon as I Knew Them] (Beirut: Maktabat
al-tijarah, 1961), pp. 24S.
6 Stephen Longrigg, Syria and Lebanon under French Mandate (London:
Oxford, 1958), p. 252. For other discussions of clerical interference, see
Bahige Tabbarah, Les Forces Politiques Actuelles au Liban (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Grenoble, 1956), pp.-94—6; and Pierre
Rondot, Les Institutions Politiques du Liban (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale,
1947), pp. 107-10.
7 Gabriel Puaux, Deux Années au Levant: 1939-1940 (Paris: Hachette,
1952), pp. 80-111.
8 Ibid., pp. 84-5, 88.
® The Black Book of the Lebanese Elections of May 25, 1947 (New York:
Phoenicia, 1947), prepared by the opposition National Bloc (Emile Edde’s
group).
10 When the cabinet refused to present to Parliament a bill prepared by the
Lawyers’ Council that would have instituted a personal-status code common
to all sects, the lawyers struck. L’Orient, February 5, 1952, noted that the
lawyers had appealed to the cabinet for action and not to the Parliament,
indicating the latter’s relative unimportance. It also noted that the cabinet was
reluctant to stop the strike because nine of its ten members were lawyers. Later,
when a compromise was proposed that would have given people a choice of
religious or nonreligious court jurisdiction in legal matters not strictly re-
lated to dogma, the religious leaders called a general strike that closed down
the markets. In present-day Lebanon the religious courts retain their au-
thority in matters of personal status and dogma.
‘1 For example, he told a reporter from al-Jarida: “Le présent Régime doit
partir, car il a échoué, tant sur le plan extérieur, que sur le plan in-
férieurs es
[“The present regime must go, for it has failed; this failure is as clear in
foreign affairs as in domestic matters.”] L’Orient, April 20, 1958. See also
Chapter 7.

=== PDF_PAGE 183 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 163
12 During the 1964 elections, for example, the Maronite Patriarch issued a
pee attacking the Chehab regime for flagrant violation of fair proce-
ures,
13 For a discussion of the Patriarch’s activities, see Fahim I. Qubain, Crisis
in Lebanon (Washington: Middle East Institute, 1961), pp. 50, 83, 87.
14 Figures quoted by Tabbarah, op. cit., pp. 153-60.
1 Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d, pp. 22-3.
'6 Bashir I, the famous and next to last ruling Chehab amir (1788-1840),
survived three attempts by Jazzar Pasha of Acre to remove him and consoli-
dated his power by destroying the influence of all but one of the important
Druze shaykhs. At the same time he meted out stern justice and built impres-
sive public works. His portrait, on view at the mountain palace he built at
Beiteddine, conveys his character perfectly. See Kamal Salibi, The Modern
History of Lebanon (London: Weidenfeld, 1965), pp. 18-23. For a discus-
sion of modern feudal notables, see Arnold Hottinger, ““Zu‘ama’ and Parties
in the Lebanese Crisis of 1958,” Middle East Journal, 15 (1961), 127-40;
and Hottinger, “Zu‘ama’ in Historical Perspective,’ in Leonard Binder (ed.),
Politics in Lebanon (New York: Wiley, 1966), pp. 85-105.
17 Richard Pearse, Three Years in the Levant (London: Macmillan, 1949),
por 6h
18 The “grand list” system divided the country into five electoral districts,
which corresponded to the province (muhafaza) boundaries and enabled the
most influential families to extend their immediate influence at the expense
of lesser families, thus allowing a small oligarchy to control Parliament. The
grand list was used in the 1943 and 1947 elections. For a discussion of
competitive patterns over time see Chapter 6.
19 Kesrouan Labaki, “Sous le Signe du Féodal,” L’Orient, June 1, 1948.
20 For an account, see The Arab World, March 10, 1954.
21 Kerr, “The 1960 Lebanese Parliamentary Elections,” Middle Eastern
Affairs, 11, No. 9 (1960), 270.
22 Saeb Salam, Lubndn wahidun la lubnanan (Beirut: Cénacle Libanaise,
1961). For a later general statement see his interview with Charles Aste in
Magazine, June 26, 1965, p. 11.
23 Bechara al-Khoury, Hagd’iq lubnaniyyah [Lebanese Truths], I (Beirut:
Awraq lubnaniyyah, 1961), 94-103; Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d, pp. 42, 47-9.
24 Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d, pp. 36-7.
25 “T ebanon is basically a beautiful and noble experiment in peaceful co-
habitation of religions, of traditions, of races. It is a natural experiment,
which history offers as a still more decisive demonstration than that of Switz-
erland in the heart of Europe.” Michel Chiha, “Vérites Libanaises,” in
Politique Intérieure (Beirut: Trident, 1964), p. 250.
26 Albert Hourani, Syria and Lebanon (London: Oxford, 1946), pp. 196-8.
27Kazem Sulh, Le Probléme du Rattachment et de la Séparation au Liban
(Beirut: 1936). Sulh opted for a separate and independent Lebanon by
dissenting from the “Congress of the Coast,” an assembly of Syrian Muslim
notables that met in Beirut in March 1936 to petition France to leave Syria
(including Lebanon) independent and unified. The party helped to consoli-
date Muslim support for independent Lebanon under the auspices of Sulh

=== PDF_PAGE 184 ===
164 * ACTORS
and his brother Takieddine. Mohammed Majzoub, Le Liban et l Orient
Arabe, 1943-1956 (Aix-en-Provence: Pensée Universitaire, 1956), pp. 106-7.
28 Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d, p. 49; Salibi, op. cit., pp. 171-6.
29 Camille Chamoun, one of the original Destourians, broke with Khoury
in 1948, when the latter had the Constitution amended and his term re-
newed. Chamoun implies in his memoirs, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris:
Gallimard, 1963), p. 88, that Khoury was not the founder of the Destour.
Chamoun writes that the party was originated by a three-man delegation
that included Michel Zaccour, Shaykh Farid al-Khazen, and Chamoun him-
self and that had presented a list of grievances to the High Commissioner
Martel following the 1934 elections. This group was then enlarged to in-
clude Amir Majid Arslan, Hamid Frangieh, Sabri Hamadeh, and Selim Taqla.
Khoury waited six weeks before joining it. The three-man delegation, how-
ever, had met at Khoury’s house before seeing the High Commissioner.
30 The issues of Le Jour (published by the banker Michel Chiha, a friend
and, in some instances, a relative of men in the Destour) for August 3, 10,
and 18, 1943, give reports of pre-election rallies of the Constitutional Bloc
in Mount Lebanon that indicate the spontaneous, loosely organized, and
popular nature of the Destour at the moment of its greatest solidarity. At
one rally nearly 15,000 persons from all over Lebanon reportedly listened
enthusiastically to speeches from the notables who were members of the
Destour: Wadih Naim (Maronite lawyer), Amir Majid Arslan (Druze land-
lord), Louis Ziadeh (Maronite lawyer), Camille Chamoun (Maronite lawyer),
Abdallah Hajj (Shiite rentier), Dr. Aziz Aoun (Maronite), Bahige Takieddine
(Druze lawyer), Emile Lahoud (Maronite lawyer), Dr. Elias Khoury (Maron-
ite). In addition, the Destourians formed the core of a broader independence
movement that included important leaders like Saeb Salam and Riad Sulh
and lawyer-bankers like Henri Pharaon, Habib Abuchahla, and Selim Taqla.
On the other hand, the National Bloc of Emile Edde was largely confined
to Mount Lebanon, although it was loosely connected through the Maronite
Church with notables in North Lebanon and Beirut. The following notables
of Mount Lebanon were associated with Edde: Amin Saad, Georges Akl,
Toufic Rizk, Ahmad Husseini (Shiite), Georges Zouein, Kesrouan al-Khazen,
Wadih Ashkar, Gabriel Murr, Roukoz Abunader, Georges Yazbek, Abdul-
Ghani al-Khatib (Sunnite), Kamal Jumblat (Druze; he was a member of
the National Bloc until the November crisis, when he broke with the caucus),
Jamil Talhouk (Druze), and Amine Nakhleh. In socioeconomic and cultural
background, these notables were hardly distinguishable from their opposite
numbers in the Destour.
31“ | . [W]e are, because of our very diversity, devoted internally to a
politics of toleration and liberty and abroad to a policy of equilibrium and
wisdom, which are the conditions of our defense and of our progress.” Henri
Pharaon, Au Service du Liban (Beirut: Le Jour, 1959), p. 63:
32 Article I, paragraph 3 of the Alexandria Protocol of October 7, 1944,
states: “The decisions of the Council will be binding on those who have
accepted them except in cases where a disagreement arises between two
member states of the League in which case the two parties shall refer their
dispute to the Council for solution. In this case the decision of the Council
will be binding.” The Covenant of the Arab League of March 22, 1945,

=== PDF_PAGE 185 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics « 165
states in Article VII, “Decisions of the Council by unanimous assent shall
be obligatory on all the states participant in the League. Decisions of the
League by majority [vote] shall be obligatory on those who accept them.”
Muhammad Khalil (ed.), The Arab States and the Arab League, Il (Beirut:
Khayat’s, 1962), 53-61.
°° The Protocol was entered into by Riad Sulh, the “cosigner” of the
National Pact, a fact that suggests that he had not entirely shed his Arab
_ Nationalist commitment upon assuming office in Lebanon. See Pharaon’s
article “From the Protocol of Alexandria to the Establishment of the League
of Arab States,” Taydr wa-telegraf (Beirut), February 15-16, 1965.
*4The Tashnaq and the Henchaq both antedate the establishment of
Greater Lebanon: The Tashnaq was established in Tiflis in 1890, and the
Henchaq in Geneva in 1887. The Armenian parties have disciplined
memberships and paramilitary capabilities. Total membership of the Tashnaq
in 1964 was estimated to be 2,000, whereas the Henchaq claimed to have
5,000 members. Michael W. Suleiman, Political Parties in Lebanon (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1967), pp. 222-3.
85 There is also a middle group of the Liberal Democratic Party (the
Ramgavar Azagadan) that would like to see Armenia freed but sees no im-
mediate prospects that this liberation will occur and works instead to pre-
serve Armenian culture wherever Armenian communities have been estab-
lished.
36 Babikian voted with the Sami Sulh government in the confidence votes
of January 30 and March 27, 1958.
37 Babikian was Minister of State in charge of administrative reform in
the Saeb Salam government of August 1960—-May 1961. He had been chosen
for this task, he says, partly because there were few Armenians in the
bureaucracy and he would thus be considered relatively neutral.
38 This program consisted of the following points: first, defense of Leba-
nese sovereignty and independence; second, support for the Allies in the
cause of democracy; third, tolerance for all beliefs and individual rights;
fourth, establishment of treaties, to reflect good and brotherly relations with
neighboring states without impairing Lebanese sovereignty; fifth, political
harmony, peace, and progress and the appeasement of passions in a just
manner; sixth, on the administrative level, maintenance of order and equal
rights for all citizens; seventh, on the moral, social, and cultural level, im-
provement of family life and education, the right to work, and protection
of the young and old; eighth, on the economic and financial level, develop-
ment of the national resources—agriculture, commerce, industry, tourism,
winter sports, and so on—and fiscal justice; ninth, improvement of the
future of youth; tenth, development of better contacts with Lebanese over-
seas. Le Jour, August 14, 1943.
89 The men were Pierre Gemayel, who has remained its chief for twenty
years; Chafic Nassif, a lawyer who left the party and became a follower
of President Chamoun in the 1950s; Georges Naccache, the publisher of
L’Orient, who has been a supporter and friendly critic of the party from
the beginning; and Charles Helou, the future President, who was also as-
sociated with the Destourians and Greek Catholic circles.
40 Statements of the party’s position may be found in the following of its

=== PDF_PAGE 186 ===
166 * ACTORS
publications: Declaration (Beirut, 1956), which contains, among other things,
a speech by Pierre Gemayel that he delivered in August 1954; National
Unity (Beirut, n.d.), the proceedings of a press conference given by Pierre
Gemayel.
41 For eyewitness accounts, see Eugénie Elie Abouchdid, Thirty Years of
Lebanon and Syria: 1917-1947 (Beirut: Sader-Rihani, 1948), pp. 133-71;
see also “Pierre Gemayel dans la Petite Histoire,” Action Proche-Orient
(Beirut: 1961), pp. 43-7; and Les Phalanges Libanaises, 25 Ans au Service
du Liban (Beirut: 1961).
42 See, for example, Maurice Gemayel, Le Planification Intégrale des Eaux
Libanaises (Beirut: St. Paul, 1951).
43 Phalanges Libanaises, op. cit., p. 19.
44 Out of a reported membership of 50,000 in 1959. Lucien George and
Toufic Mokdessi, Les Partis Libanais en 1959 (Beirut: Editions [’Orient-al-
Jaryda, 1959), pp. 35, 41. See also Nicola Ziadeh, “The Lebanese Elections,
1960,” Middle East Journal, 14 (Autumn 1960), 370. In 1965 a party
official said that there were now 10,000 Shiite members and a total member-
ship of 68,000.
45 A Kataeb party official went to some length to distinguish between
Kataeb democratic centralism and communist democratic centralism. In the
Kataeb, he said, members at all levels discuss issues before the central council
takes a decision. The results of these discussions are transmitted from the
sections—the basic units consisting of fifty to one hundred members each—
through two intermediate levels to the central council.
46 My interview with a Kataeb leader, May 24, 1962, and with a former
Kataeb member, May 8, 1962.
47In an interview on August 11, 1965, President Chamoun claimed that
the N.L.P. was far more than a caucus of notables, because it had between
17,000 and 18,000 registered members, but he also stated that the party
is not well organized.
48 Bechara al-Khoury, Haqd’iq lubnaniyyah, I, 40-1. Camille Chamoun in
his memoirs, op. cit., pp. 198-9, writes that he insisted that President Khoury
remove the allegedly corrupt éminence grise and purify his entourage but
that the President took the suggestion as a personal insult.
49 Khoury, op. cit., III, 34-6.
50 His opponent, however, was not a Destourian: Pierre Gemayel of the
Kataeb was defeated by Edde, although the Kataeb was at the time under
theoretical suspension by the government.
51 Khoury, op. cit., III, 472.
52. On his deathbed, Abboud accused his rival of having arranged his
murder, and a later investigation implicated Ali in the crime. Ali, who had
also been under attack for his part in wheat-purchase scandals, went to
prison for two years. This legal difficulty did not noticeably impair his
political career; he was returned to Parliament in 1960 and held a cabinet
post.
53 Emile Bustani later claimed that, although he had broken with Jumblat,
he had still helped him in 1953 and was responsible for supplying the votes
that enabled him to beat his opponent, the ex-Destourian, Bahige Takied-

=== PDF_PAGE 187 ===
The Establishment and Its Politics + 167
dine. See Bustani’s declaration of June, 1957, Reasons for the Failure of
Kamal Jumblat in the General Elections (in Arabic), American University
of Beirut Library.
54 For a commentary on the Beirut elections, see Richard H. Nolte, “Leba-
nese Elections,” American Universities Field Staff Letter, July 13, 1953.
5° Kamal Jumblat had almost merged his following with the Syrian Na-
tional Party in 1949, but doctrinal and leadership differences and then the
_ abortive P.P.S. coup of that year had prevented it. In 1951 there was dis-
cussion of a merger between Jumblat’s P.S.P. and the Kataeb. George and
Mokdessi, op. cit., p. 14.
°6In a postelection press conference, Jumblat complained that President
Chamoun, the gendarmerie, and certain officials had engineered his defeat.
L’Orient, June 19, 1957. As Jumblat’s former ally, Emile Bustani, op. cit.,
tells it, Jumblat promoted the cause of Bustani’s own electoral rival in a
neighboring district at the same time he exploited Bustani’s reputation by
attaching Anwar Khatib, the P.S.P. vice-president, to Bustani’s coattails.
Bustani was not to be used so brazenly. He insisted that Khatib quit the
P.S.P. and toured Jumblat’s district, urging his friends to elect Jumblat’s
rival, which they did.
57 A reporter in L’Orient, July 4, 1960, remarked: “Sans doute, il ne faut
pas croire que Baalbek et le Hermel se soient métamorphosés. Le Bey y
reste le Bey. Mais il est incontestable qu’un trés fort courant anti-féodal se
dessine dans la région.”
[‘“Doubtless, one cannot assume that Baalbek and Hermel have alto-
gether changed. The Bey is still the Bey. But it is unarguable that a very
strong antifeudal current is taking shape in the area.”]
58 T’Orient, July 4, 1960.
