=== PDF_PAGE 188 ===
CHAPTER ™ 5)
The Radical Outsiders
The Lebanese establishment described in the preceding chapter
must now contend with a radical counterelite composed of assorted
cliques, movements, and parties representing both the right and the
left. Although this counterelite is rarely organized for concerted ac-
tion, its members share some important characteristics. They are
all hostile, or at least lack commitment, to the Lebanese entity as
it now exists. To the establishment they appear as real or potential
fifth columnists. Their programs stress sweeping reform and range
from advocacy of Islamic theocracy to proletarian democracy; their
various doctrines share an orientation to total commitment, in
contradistinction to the prevailing pragmatic and instrumental tenor
of establishment politics. Prominent in this counterelite are Syrian
nationalists, Muslim nationalists, communists, Lebanese socialists,
and Arab nationalists of Nasserist or Baathist persuasion.
The names of the counterelite groups alone suggest that these
outsiders should generate tensions in the Lebanese system, and in-
deed they do. Although it is true that each explicitly and perhaps
sincerely professes allegiance to the Republic, such protestations can-
not obscure the inherently revolutionary implications of their basic
objectives. It is therefore not surprising that the establishment has
worked to exclude them from participation in power. Exclusion from
the formal system appears to aggravate rather than to reduce this
danger. The political effect of these outsiders, however, is not en-
tirely dysfunctional. They are the most important deterrents to stag-
nation in the political system. Although they play only a small role
in the formal institutions, their influence is widely felt. The outsiders
force the establishment to recognize the existence of demands for
168

=== PDF_PAGE 189 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 169
nationalism and social justice. Recognition is an important first step
toward political innovation; unfortunately it is not a substitute for
implementation.
The radical outsiders come from a growing, newly politicized
stratum in the middle class. They fall materially somewhat below
the socioeconomic level of the successful lawyers and businessmen
who are the liberal element in the establishment. At present their
groups exist in a kind of political limbo—several are illegal but not
persecuted—turning out their newspapers full of dreams and griev-
ances, meeting in coffeehouses and stuffy offices, attracting students,
teachers, technicians, clerks, white-collar employees, and small-time
lawyers to discuss, organize, and plot. Lebanese parochialism, how-
ever, remains a formidable obstacle to political organization, a fact
that representatives of all the major political tendencies among the
outsiders readily admit. Matters are further complicated by the
transnational perspectives of most of the outsiders. Lebanon still
. fulfills its historic function as a refuge for persecuted minorities,
and the political conflicts of the Arab world are thus played out,
almost bigger than life, on this tiny stage. In this sense, Lebanon is
indeed a barometer of inter-Arab relations. The integration of the
outsiders is thus at once most crucial for Lebanese stability and most
difficult to achieve.
Bizarre is perhaps the best word to describe radical politics in
Lebanon. The organizations that have developed outside the formal
arena include an astonishing range of attitudes, behavior, and
philosophies. To talk with brilliant young recruits of the Syrian
National Party—the party that has made two serious attempts to
overthrow the regime—is to confront thwarted idealism twisted into
a doctrine of total escape. The Progressive Socialists are simulta-
neously mystics and pacifists. The various Sunnite theocrats preach
rule by the Koran. The Arab nationalists, in their several forms,
simultaneously exalt the past glories of Arab civilization and claim
to be the vanguard of modernity. Within the establishment the range
of attitudes runs from liberal conservatism to conservative liberalism.
Outside the establishment there are no limits; indeed, there is not
even a satisfactory spectrum along which to arrange the different
organizations. What they do have in common, however, is radicalism,
illegitimacy (in terms of the present political system), and isolation
from the formal political institutions. They embody the new tend-
encies and dreams of the excluded but expanding political stratum.
Since the creation of Greater Lebanon in 1920 there has been a

=== PDF_PAGE 190 ===
170 * ACTORS
rapid proliferation of radical organizations, just as there has been
increasing differentiation of groups within the establishment. The
first series of new radical organizations was created during the 1930s,
at the same time that such establishment groups as the Destour and
the National Bloc began to develop. Of the several associations,
committees, and congresses active during that period, three organiza-
tions remain significant today: the Syrian National Party (P.P.S.),
the Najjadeh, and the Communist Party. Under the Mandate they
all were suppressed at various times. Each developed a conspiratorial
style, some degree of mass following, elaborate hierarchy of com-
mand, strong discipline and dedication to an almost totalitarian
ideology. The P.P.S. and Najjadeh organizations placed heavy em-
phasis on physical prowess and paramilitary training, the Com-
munists upon secret organization. Since independence all these
groups have undergone organizational changes and have continued
to suffer from official displeasure and some popular suspicion, but
they have not lost their political significance.
In the postindependence period, and particularly in the period
since the Palestine War, a new group of organizations has appeared
on the Lebanese scene, differing from the earlier ones in form and
philosophy but sharing the characteristics of radicalism, nonlegiti-
macy, and isolation. The newer groups—of which the most im-
portant are the Arab nationalist movement, the Baath, and the
Progressive Socialist Party—do not share the fascistic style and the
militia organization of the first mass organizations. Unlike the first-
generation outsiders their ideologies favor Arab unity, Arab na-
tionalism, Arab socialism, and democracy. Indeed, postwar equali-
tarian populism has affected the older groups too: There has been
a tendency toward social democracy observable in the P.P.S., partly
for tactical reasons. The Communists have made the ideological
adjustment most easily. New or old, however, the important radical
organizations cannot commit themselves fully to accepting the
legitimacy of the Lebanese political system. Whether their orienta-
tion is pan-Syrian, pan-Islamic, pan-Arab, or Communist and no
matter how loudly they proclaim Lebanon’s “special status,” the
ambiguity of loyalties among the radicals has hindered the emer-
gence of an effective or a responsible opposition, except within the
constrictive limits imposed by establishment rivalries.

=== PDF_PAGE 191 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 17]
THE RaApDICAL RIGHT
In the topsy-turvy politics of Lebanon the terms “right” and “left”
are perhaps too simple to be appropriate. Nevertheless, they may
be helpful for distinguishing between those groups whose orienta-
tion is essentially romantic and those that at least profess a scien-
tific basis. Even this crude distinction is open to objection in the
case of the P.P.S., which has a certain attraction for “modern”
types, and the Arab nationalists, whose instrumental programs are
clothed in primordial appeals. The participants themselves make
such distinctions, however, so this classification may have some
utility.
The Syrian National Party (P.P.S.)
_ The Syrian National Party (Parti Populaire Syrien), later named the
Socialist National Party, is a semisecret, pseudofascist, paramilitary
cadre party. It was founded by Antoun Saadeh, a thirty-year-old
Greek Orthodox teacher and former émigré (to Brazil), in the
years 1932 to 1934." Saadeh, remembered as a charismatic person-
ality, founded his organization on eight fundamental principles:
First, Syria is for the Syrians, and the Syrians are a complete na-
tion. Second, the Syrian cause is an autonomous national cause.
Third, the Syrian cause is the cause of the nation and homeland.
Fourth, the Syrian nation is the ethnic unity of the Syrian people,
a unity dating back to prehistoric times. Fifth, the Syrian country is
geographically distinct, extending from the Taurus Range to the
Suez Canal, including the Sinai Peninsula and the Gulf of Aqaba,
and from the Syrian Sea (sic) in the west to the desert in the east
up to its junction with the Tigris.” Sixth, the Syrian nation is one
society and community. Seventh, the Syrian national movement
seeks its inspiration in the talents and genius of the Syrian nation
in history. Eighth, Syria’s interests are above all other interests.’
The Syrian spirit, according to the P.P.S., is to be elevated by
adherence to the ideals of Truth, Justice, Love, Beauty, Power, and
Order. The party defines the Syrian personality as “a new racial
compound. This process started with the peoples of the neolithic
age which preceded the Canaanites in settling this land, to the
Canaanites themselves, to the Amorites, Hittites, and Aramaics, to
the Greeks, Romans, and Arabs. Thus we see that the principle of

=== PDF_PAGE 192 ===
172 * ACTORS
Syrian nationhood is not based on race or blood unity, but rather
on the natural social unity of a racial compound.” * It seems, there-
fore, that P.P.S. nationalism is based partially on racial pride but
more heavily on a common social and cultural heritage. Its similarity
to German fascism is greater in terms of organization than of
philosophy.® The party’s policy positions include the separation of
church and state, the removal of sectarian barriers, and the non-
interference of the clergy in politics. This last belief, if nothing
else, is enough to challenge the fundamental political formula of
Lebanon and accounts in some measure for the failure of the
P.P.S. to attract general support. The Syrian Nationalist Party’s
implacable opposition to communism and Zionism, as threats to the
Syrian nation, has drawn Lebanese intellectuals and professionals
who otherwise might not have been attracted. In recent times, since
Antoun Saadeh’s death by firing squad in 1949, a faction represent-
ing socioeconomic reform has generally dominated the party; there
has also been talk of finding ways to attain a “normal balance” of
income distribution and a guarantee for the rights of labor. This
talk marks an extension of the ideas of state capitalism originally
put forth by Antoun Saadeh. A central issue in the trials after the
party’s unsuccessful coups in 1949 and 1961 was whether social
reform or the absorption of Lebanon into a greater Syrian state was
its dominant motive. The leader of the Putsch of 1961 fervently
declared that the party had adopted a position of respect toward
Lebanese sovereignty.®
By 1935 the P.P.S. numbered about 1,000 members. Out-
spokenly antisectarian, the membership was predominantly from the
minorities—principally the Greek Orthodox and Protestant groups,
though there were also Druzes and Shiites. Opposed at that time
both to the Lebanese entity and to Muslim or Arab nationalism, the
party was understandably less popular with the two major sects,
Sunnite and Maronite. Saadeh’s doctrine and organization provided
an outlet for the growing number of politically conscious young
men who could not accept French-Maronite paternalism or the al-
ternative radical ideologies. The P.P.S. was remarkably tenacious,
considering the adversities it suffered. Dissolved in 1937, it was
again legalized in 1944 when the local leadership came to terms
with the authorities over Lebanon’s status while Saadeh was still in
Argentina. When Saadeh returned in 1947, however, he vitiated
this rapprochement and expelled a number of important subleaders.
In the following months, during the Palestine crisis and the sub-

=== PDF_PAGE 193 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 173
sequent upheavals, the P.P.S. strengthened its armed militia, aided in
Syria by the new revolutionary government of Husni Zaim. The Leb-
anese government of Riad Sulh, who had no sympathy for an anti-
Arab nationalist doctrine, saw a substantial threat to its security
developing and therefore, it is said, precipitated a bloody clash be-
tween the P.P.S. and the Kataeb in the Jummaizeh quarter of
Beirut. Taking the incident as a pretext, the government arrested
250 members, dissolved the party again, made more arrests, and
declared that it had evidence implicating the P.P.S. in antinational
activities, in particular, collaboration with the Zionists.? Saadeh
escaped to Syria and organized some P.P.S. commando raids into
Lebanese territory during the following days. Then, on the night
of July 7, Antoun Saadeh was captured, tried, and executed before
a firing squad.®
Saadeh’s martyrdom weakened the P.P.S. but did not destroy it.
In Syria the pro-Egyptian, anti-British Colonel Zaim was assas-
_sinated barely a month later in a coup reportedly supported by
Iraq, Jordan, and Britain; but the P.P.S. continued to operate
there, as in the other Fertile Crescent countries, until the socialists
emerged. In Lebanon the party regrouped, finding sympathy among
notables hostile to the Khoury-Riad Sulh regime. Kamal Jumblat
and Camille Chamoun condemned the government for its summary
execution of Saadeh, and they joined with Ghassan Tueni—a
former P.P.S. member and an active sympathizer of the party—to
form the nucleus of the anti-Destour opposition. The National
Bloc, which had long-standing grievances against Khoury, was also
associated with the general opposition. It was outside the Parlia-
ment, and indeed outside Lebanon, however, that the P.P.S. made
its most effective move: On July 16, 1951, a P.P.S. agent assas-
sinated Riad Sulh at the Amman airport. It was an act of personal
revenge and a blow at the Arab nationalism that Riad Sulh had
championed since the Peace Conference. The murder also weakened
the regime of Bechara al-Khoury by depriving it of the essential Sun-
nite Muslim support that Riad Sulh had mobilized. Now leadership of
the Sunnites was parceled out among less charismatic and more
parochial notables, most of whom had nursed grudges against the
regime for a long time. After the election of Camille Chamoun to
the Presidency the P.P.S. enjoyed increasing governmental tolerance,
even at the expense of Lebanon’s relations with Syria and Egypt
after 1954. When the militant wing of the P.P.S. assassinated the
Syrian Baathist Chief of Staff, Colonel Adnan Malki, in 1955, the

=== PDF_PAGE 194 ===
174 * ACTORS
wrath of Baathists, Nasserists, and the military forced the PPS:
leaders to take refuge in Lebanon. Two years later, when the Nas-
serist-socialist movement began to gain ground in Lebanon, Presi-
dent Chamoun’s government had at hand a formidable paramilitary
instrument with which to combat the insurgents. Party officials
estimated that in 1958-1959 the P.P.S. numbered 25,000 active
members in Lebanon and 3,500 overseas.?
Although at the end of the Chamoun regime the party was legal
and had a man in Parliament, the P.P.S. found the going tougher
under the regime of General Chehab, which was weighted in favor
of the insurgents—old Destourians, young officers, socialists, Arab
nationalists, and Muslim notables. On December 31, 1961, the
party, by then in cooperation with a dissident clique of junior army
officers and encouraged by the secession of Syria from the United
Arab Republic three months earlier, struck again with its cus-
tomary audacity and nearly achieved a successful Putsch. There
was strong suspicion that the coup had been financed partly by
Jordan and Britain as part of a plan to encourage an anti-Nasser
federation of Syria, Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon.” The head of the
party, however, declared at the trial that the plot was motivated
solely by Lebanon’s interior malaise. Abdallah Saadeh said:
Les causes du putsch relévent de la politique intérieure uniquement.
Elles ne s’inspirent pas, contrairement a ce que dit l’acte d’accusation,
@une idée étrangére au Liban. Notre but était d’opérer une réforme
et une renaissance sociale modérées de gauche, d’instituer la justice
sociale et la démocratie authentique, de relever le niveau de vie dans
toutes les régions du pays. Nous voulions délivrer le pauvre de la
misére, du besoin et de la maladie.1
The grievances of Captain Fuad Awad, leader of the dissident of-
ficers, were more specific. He complained that the army had re-
mained indifferent to the massive influx of smuggled arms from
Syria in 1957 and 1958, and he objected to the pro-Nasser tend-
encies of some officers and men. He felt that the American-spon-
sored solution to the 1958 crisis had given the insurgents an un-
deserved victory. The dissatisfied officers also objected to alleged
intervention by the army’s Deuxiéme Bureau in certain election
campaigns.’ Had the plot succeeded it is likely that the civil war
of 1958 would have broken out anew, for the plotters could claim
dedicated support from only a few areas.’* The coup failed by a
narrow margin, and the regime hunted down suspects with an ef-

=== PDF_PAGE 195 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 175
ficiency that surprised everybody and dismayed many. The P.P.S.
again went underground to begin anew.
The Najjadeh
The Najjadeh (“Helpers”) is the most prominent of several Islamic
political groups in modern Lebanon. Others include the Islamic
Liberation Party and the Muslim Group. The journalist Muhieddine
Nsouli founded the Najjadeh as a youth group in 1936, at the
same time that the Maronite youth leader Pierre Gemayel was
forming the Kataeb. Like the P.P.S. and the Kataeb the Najjadeh
has a paramilitary aspect, but it has a smaller and less tightly
managed organization than the other two have. The Mandate au-
thorities dissolved the Najjadeh in 1937, but it functioned under-
ground until independence in 1943. During the events of Novem-
ber 1943, the Najjadeh joined forces with the Kataeb and other
anti-French elements to carry out the general strike that ultimately
_led to the liberation of the government. Though the Najjadeh and
the Kataeb soon parted company, each claims the initiative and the
credit for having won independence. The postindependence years
were good ones for the Najjadeh. In 1944 Riad Sulh publicly
praised its 13,000 members, calling them his partisans, and there
were signs of genuine cooperation with the Maronites who largely
made up the membership of the Kataeb.™*
Five years later, however, as the domestic situation deteriorated,
Riad Sulh dissolved the organization, along with all youth groups
that were involved in politics, because he felt that such involvement
was incompatible with the dignity of the state and the army. In
1953, after the death of Riad Sulh and the fall of Bechara al-
Khoury, the Najjadeh returned with a new leader and a new or-
ganization. The new leader was Adnan Hakim, proprietor of an
optical store in Beirut and a flamboyant stump speaker. This time
the Najjadeh was officially recognized as a political party, and as
such it sought to build electoral strength in the Sunnite areas not
only in Beirut but also outside it. In the 1958 crisis the Najjadeh
was dissolved again for its antiregime operations, but during the
insurgency a bitter dispute developed between the party and the
insurgent chief of Beirut, Saeb Salam, who shut down its radio
transmitter. It reappeared in 1959, and it had about 10,000 mem-
bers by its own estimate. In 1960 Adnan Hakim’s ticket won an
upset victory in Beirut, defeating, among others, the moderate
Arab nationalist, Takieddine Sulh. It hoped to pick up six seats in

=== PDF_PAGE 196 ===
176 * ACTORS
the 1964 election from Beirut and the Biqa but only managed to
lose the single seat it had won four years earlier.
The chief theoretician of the Najjadeh, Ramadan Lawand, who
is a former member of the Arab nationalist Nida al-Qawmi, is in his
own way as utopian as the ideologists of the Syrian Nationalist
Party. He feels that the goal of the Najjadeh is the resurrection of
Arab-Islamic culture. In the Lebanese context this view represents
an extreme—if not subversive—position, and the Najjadeh official
freely admits as much. Lebanon, he notes, has a split cultural per-
sonality: Part of it is Westernized, and part of it is not. This situa-
tion is unsatisfactory because the Westernized elements control the
country and deprive the Eastern elements of the chance to pursue
their cultural destiny. The Western tradition is based upon Greek
and Roman rationality, with a thin overlay of Oriental Christianity.
Islam, on the other hand, is a total way of life for the Easterner.
It cannot be “Occidentalized” by Western universities like the
American University of Beirut. Lawand concedes that the unified
Arab-Islamic state of the future will borrow freely from the “un-
contaminated” aspects of Western culture, its administrative and
bureaucratic techniques, for example. In the Najjadeh conception,
this new state will not be an Islamic Republic like Pakistan, be-
cause it will instead downgrade the formalistic and doctrinaire as-
pects of Islam in favor of promoting Islamic culture in general.
The unified Arab-Islamic state envisaged by the Najjadeh will not
be achieved in the near future, Lawand admits. Western political
influence in Lebanon is still very great, and Lebanese Muslims are
still too divided and underprivileged to act decisively. Najjadeh
leaders are nevertheless confident that the state wili become a
reality someday because they believe that all nations have destinies
to fulfill. They hope that within fifty years the Arabs will have
beaten back all “contaminated” incursions of Western culture. Ac-
cording to the Najjadeh’s view, Lebanon presumably would be a
region within the new state, and its Christians would be accorded
the status of a special community similar to their position during
the rule of the caliphs. It is not surprising that Lebanese Christians
are uneasy when they consider what their future would be like in
the kind of state envisaged by the Najjadeh.
In 1943 the Najjadeh supported the independence movement and
the National Pact principally as expedients to get rid of the French.
When the new state and the Pact clearly became instruments for
perpetuating the dominance of Christians, the Najjadeh withdrew

=== PDF_PAGE 197 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 177
its support. Not that the Najjadeh is openly subversive, for, although
it makes such contentions on a broad level, it also operates within
the general rules of the game—but clearly outside the establishment.
Because it insists on a new census, the Najjadeh is reviled by es-
tablishment Christians and non-Christians alike. When it denounces
the sectarian system as it operates in Lebanon, it is denounced
for exploiting sectarian tensions. Adnan Hakim dismisses such
charges and claims that the Najjadeh is nothing more than a mir-
ror of the people, a statement that mixes disingenuousness with a
kernel of truth.’
The Najjadeh, like all the radical groups, also supports large-
scale social reform like the 1962 social-security legislation.1® It has
supported President Chehab because of his intentions to improve the
livelihood of the rural provinces, which are mostly Muslim, and it
has supported President Nasser as a constructive Muslim-Arab re-
former. Its greatest scorn has been reserved for the big politicians
of all sects, especially the Sunnite politicians, whom it calls “com-
_ promisers” and treats with the bitter contempt reserved for brothers
who betray a cause. Lebanon has only two kinds of politicians, the
Najjadeh rightly argues; compromisers and extremists. The Naj-
jadeh is proud to belong to the latter category.
The limited success of the Najjadeh is owing largely to the
populist and antiestablishment feeling among Sunnite Muslims,
but support for the Najjadeh is hardly a good indicator of the
strength of that feeling because there are rival groups competing
for these sentiments. The Najjadeh, which espouses policies that
locate it on the fringes of secular Arab nationalism, has been
crowded out of this competition. At the mass level it can appeal
only to memories and religious feeling, and at the elite level it
spins out romantic and utopian theory; at neither level is there the
program or organization that can guide institutionalized political
behavior.
The Najjadeh Party is only one of several Muslim political
groups. Some of the others, like the “Worshippers of the Compas-
sionate” (‘Ubad al-rahman) and its more aggressive offshoot, the
Muslim Group ( al-Jama‘ah al-islamiyyah), are so poorly organized
that their political activities have been generally tolerated. Lebanon’s
Muslim Brothers (al-Ikhwan al-muslimin) have suffered from simi-
lar organizational problems and also from their opposition to secu-
lar Arab nationalism. The Muslim Brotherhood originated in Egypt,
and its adherents have not forgotten how President Nasser crushed

=== PDF_PAGE 198 ===
178 * ACTORS
it there in 1954. Organizational weakness and opposition to Nasser
have hindered the Brotherhood’s development in Lebanon; it too
has thus been generally tolerated.17 Another Muslim organization,
the Liberation Party, enjoys no such tolerance, however, because it
is more politically extreme than any of the others. The Liberation
Party, founded in Jerusalem in the early 1950s, apparently began
operating in Lebanon in 1959. The Lebanese government lost no
time in trying to suppress it for its hostile intentions toward Chris-
tians and capitalists. The party’s doctrine would allow Christians
no political participation in the unified Islamic state, and it would
forbid capitalist companies, usury, or monopoly. Even gambling
would be forbidden. Education would be “Islamicized” for all.
Needless to say, a doctrine of this nature is not acceptable to the
Lebanese establishment, Christian or Muslim. Yet a Liberation
Party candidate, although under arrest, was able to win 400 votes
in Beirut in the 1964 legislative elections.”*
The Islamic groups, even the ostensibly religious ones, remain
potentially capable of rousing Muslim masses by working through
the religious organizations. In a crisis like the alleged defamation
of the Prophet in an American University of Beirut classroom in
1966, the mosques serve as effective rallying points and the Mus-
lim groups become formidable political agitators.
THE RADICAL LEFT
The Lebanese establishment views any proposal that infringes upon
the untrammeled freedom of the wealthy citizen as both radical and
leftist. Whether the proposal is for traffic lights or for a central
bank, the characteristic response will be the same: a spirited strug-
gle against “socialist regimentation.” It is therefore not surprising
that there has been virtually no representation in the institutions of
the Lebanese Republic for political positions left of center since
the Republic was created.
Euphoric conservatives, however, tend to neglect certain trends
in Lebanon’s political environment that make the relative absence
of the left in formal politics a matter of concern. There has been
an active underground left within Lebanon since the early days of
the Mandate, and there is a labor force that is small but relatively
sophisticated. Both have been systematically excluded from power.
Outside Lebanon, the continuing revolution in the Arab world has

=== PDF_PAGE 199 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 179
allied socialism with progressive Arab nationalism and brought
pressure to bear on Lebanon’s delicate political system.
There has been a development on the left in Lebanese politics,
as the following pages attempt to show. If it gives rise to concern,
however, the concern should not be that the development is taking
place, but rather that it has been so inadequate.
The Communist Party
It is fashionable in certain establishment circles of the 1960s to
make fun of the bourgeois background of the members of Lebanon’s
Communist Party. They are usually portrayed as eccentric lawyers.
Nothing seems quite so incongruous as a Communist party in a
country where the doctrine of the free economy is hardly less well
accepted than is sectarianism itself. The Lebanese Communist
Party seems to have been even less successful than all the other
radical organizations, whose performances are hardly impressive
standards of success. Other radical groups have at least occasionally
been represented in Parliament. Arab nationalists and, in recent
years, even Baathists have drawn more substantial followings than
have the Lebanese Communists. The Americanization of Lebanon
after 1952 has made it increasingly difficult for Communists to
break into the establishment, and the post-Cold War fragmentation
of the world communist bloc has divided the movement in Lebanon
too. Despite the adversities that have befallen them, Lebanon’s Com-
munists are patiently optimistic that the political situation will change
in their favor, and, as Chapter 3 suggests, there are reasons for their
optimism.
Communists have been active in Lebanon since the Paris peace
settlement. In 1925 a Lebanese People’s Party was established under
the supervision of Yussef Yazbek, in association with, but distinct
from, the stronger Palestinian communist movement. The Lebanese
People’s Party and the Armenian group that shortly joined it were
interested primarily in alleviating the conditions of labor and in
establishing strong unions.1® In 1930 the brilliant Khaled Bakdash,
a Syrian Kurd, assumed leadership of the party, which became the
Communist Party of Syria and Lebanon, and in the following
decade the party underwent “consolidation and concentrated ideo-
logical indoctrination” and enjoyed rare official toleration during
the Popular Front regime in France.” From 1939 to 1942 the
Communist Party was again suppressed, but it re-emerged to run
three candidates in the 1943 election, all of whom lost. The party

=== PDF_PAGE 200 ===
180 * ACTORS
was still on the way up, however, and in December 1943 it con-
vened a congress in Beirut at which Khaled Bakdash defined the
party’s national orientation and support for the newly independent
states of Syria and Lebanon.”
The party declared its support for the national regime because
the regime was trying to wrest control of the Syrian-Lebanese Com-
mon Interests Administration (the government department that
regulated the customs and joint public services of the two states)
and certain companies from the French and to complete the na-
tional liberation. It spelled out the advantages of free democratic
institutions for Lebanon, emphasized minority rights, and—most
interestingly—de-emphasized the socialist character of communism,
citing Stalin’s words on the necessity for cooperation between the
workers and the bourgeoisie against the imperialists. It limited its
economic recommendations to improving administrative efficiency,
spreading basic education, raising the country’s economic level
through the development of commerce, improving agriculture, en-
couraging tourism, struggling against unemployment and poverty,
protecting the workers through labor legislation, improving the
situation of the peasant, and making the tax burden more equita-
ble.”’ It also approved of closer relations between Lebanon and the
Arab countries, especially Syria, and dismissed Christian claims
that Lebanon does not have a strictly Arab face and Christian
fears that cooperation would lead to annexation.”
The Communist Party was thus generally in line with the over-all
policies of Riad Sulh and Bechara al-Khoury. The party, now
divided again—officially at least—into Lebanese and Syrian
branches, did rather well in the 1947 elections, with two candi-
dates running in Mount Lebanon and one each in North Lebanon
and Beirut.** Later, in the general unrest that began to trouble
the Khoury regime, the Communist Party was forced to go under-
ground, where it has remained officially ever since.?® Despite this
inconvenience, however, six known Communists ran for Parliament
in 1951, and one ran in 1953, even though there was a warrant
out for his arrest at the time. One of the two Communists to run
in the 1957 elections received 276 votes to Charles Malik’s 10,302.
The other, Antoine Tabet, head of the communist-sympathizing
“Partisans of Peace” movement, did better in Beirut with 11,000
votes, but he was some 5,400 votes behind the lowest winner
there. Under the Chehab regime, Communist electoral strength de-

=== PDF_PAGE 201 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 181
clined even further; there were no candidates in 1960, and the four
who ran in 1964 did worse than Communist Party candidates
usually do.
The year 1959 was particularly bad for the party in Lebanon
and throughout the Arab world. President Nasser turned against it
and pre-empted its major areas of appeal with his own brand of
socialism. The Lebanese and Syrian branches moved even farther
apart from each other. The Baath (the noncommunist, pan-Arab
socialist party) was driven into Lebanon and began to compete
with the Lebanese Communists for the support of poor workers and
peasants in Tripoli, Nabatieh, and Baalbek. The political logic of
this situation in North Lebanon influenced the Communists to op-
pose the Baath by supporting the Rashid Karami ticket in 1960
and 1964; and one of the Karami’s co-listers, Hashem Husseini, is
known to sympathize with the party’s social welfare and anti-im-
perialist positions.
The party has developed factional problems in the 1960s. There
is, as in the past, an orthodox group aligned with Moscow, headed
by Yussef Helou, Nakhleh Moutran, Georges Hawi, and others.
It publishes a daily newspaper, al-Nida, and a weekly, al-Akhbar.
This group represents the mainstream of the Lebanese movement,
and it is a direct descendant of the original labor-oriented commu-
nists of the Lebanese People’s Party. There is also a splinter group
headed by an old-time Greek Orthodox lawyer, Hassib Nimr, who
wishes to reshape the party along Italian lines and to free the party
from the guidance of Moscow. Although the splinter group is gen-
erally pro-Moscow, it also tries to deal with Peking. Finally, a pro-
Peking social-revolutionary faction has also emerged. Little is
known about its strength and membership, but it is thought that
this group is subsidized through the Embassy of Communist China
in Damascus. Because it depends on Chinese Communist funds and
guidance, the goals of this group are understandably less moderate.
Political observers guess that membership in all factions of the
Communist Party combined probably came to about 4,000 mem-
bers in 1965, about half the estimated membership in 1959. It is
also generally agreed that the bulk of the membership comes from
the middle class. The greatest number of lower-class communists
are probably not members of the party at all but rather belong to
the Federation of Labor Unions, an illegal combination of the
unions of the carpenters; printers; builders; cooks; hotel, restaurant,

=== PDF_PAGE 202 ===
182 * ACTORS
and coffeeshop workers; painters; and shoemakers. These seven
unions include some 3,000—4,000 workers and are affiliated with
the communist-backed World Federation of Trade Unions.”
Although recent history does not seem to have been very kind
to the Lebanese Communists, they do not give the appearance of
being discouraged. Leaders of the old Moscow group and the
Italian-style splinter are in basic agreement that the social situation
in Lebanon is becoming increasingly ripe for an awakening of
political consciousness among the poor workers and farmers. A
writer for al-Nida declared in an interview that the political system
in the 1960s is more vulnerable to communist attacks than ever
before. He suggested that, as only 4 per cent of the population
benefits from the “free economy,” there is a great deal of potential
opposition waiting to be organized. He also believed that most
Lebanese workers and farmers are disgusted with the situation.
Confronted with the apparent disarray of the Communist Party
apparatus, a member of the dissident group conceded that post-
World War II commercial development and enlargement of the
middle class had delayed the class struggle, but he felt that the
setback was only temporary. During 1965 the Communist Party
was engaged in trying to promote the class struggle by collaborating
in a coalition socialist front with the stronger radical groups in the
country, like Kamal Jumblat’s new Free Labor Front, and by in-
cessantly attacking all things imperialist—from the Vietnam war
to a proposed American-Lebanese investment-guarantees treaty.
The persistent optimism of the Communists in free-enterprise
Lebanon seems unwarranted in the short run, but their middle-run
and long-run prospects are very different matters. Under normal
circumstances the urban and rural proletariat seems to prefer
primordial affiliations to modern ones, but such loyalties result in
political weakness that becomes less tolerable with every economic
or political crisis. One veteran Western observer of the labor scene
sees no linear trend toward increasingly serious strikes, but he
thinks that Lebanon’s chronic labor unrest is politically dangerous,
particularly the waves of trouble that occur about every four years.
Another student of Lebanese labor, however, has suggested that
there is a discernible rising trend of industrial conflict.27 This ob-
server has also discovered that the employers win the greater part
of the conflicts, a fact that at once underlines labor’s discontent
and its organizational weakness. If Lebanon’s Communists could

=== PDF_PAGE 203 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 183
overcome their own organizational weakness, they could probably
develop a powerful following.
Socialists and Arab Nationalists
After the corrupt elections of 1947, Riad Sulh predicted the de-
velopment of loyal, legitimate, and modern parties in the four
years following the elections as a consequence of his pledge to
abolish the system of sectarian political representation.”* Sulh, like
many Lebanese, believed that sectarianism was the chief barrier to
political modernity. Sulh was never able to redeem his pledge be-
cause agents of the P.P.S. murdered him, and a Western-style party
system failed to materialize. Instead, three new radical movements
burst into importance.
Whereas the preindependence period was favorable to the de-
velopment of parties with totalitarian appeals, the 1940s produced
organizations with an emphasis on equalitarianism and social re-
form. The domestic corruption of the Khoury regime stimulated
their growth. The Progressive Socialist Party, the Arab nationalist
movement, and the Baath had a focus quite different from that of
the preindependence movements. Men in the new groups had lit-
tle first-hand experience of the Ottoman period, the early Arab
national struggle, or World War I and its Peace Settlement. They
were children of the Mandate to whom Lebanese independence,
World War II, the successes of the communist movement, and the
Palestine struggle were landmark events. Social reform, social
justice, and Socialism came to occupy a place in the forefront of
their thinking, along with a demand for Arab unity or coopera-
tion. The major problem thus remained: to integrate the new or-
ganizations into the old, carefully balanced, formal institutions.
Kamal Jumblat and the Progressive Socialist Party (P.S.P.)
Lebanon’s brightest hope for an indigenous party of the left, in-
tegrated both across sectarian lines and into the formal political
system, has rested for years with Kamal Jumblat and his Progres-
sive Socialist Party. Unfortunately, the hope has faded in the
1960s. Nevertheless, Jumblat and his party remain highly signifi-
cant in Lebanese politics, although the content of the P.S.P.’s
ideology, a mixture of French socialism, Indian pacifism, and
Lebanese Druze traditionalism, might seem strange to foreign
observers.

=== PDF_PAGE 204 ===
184 * ACTORS
Kamal Jumblat is a feudal socialist. As chieftain of one of the
two traditional factions of the Lebanese Druze sect, he distributed
some of his lands among his tenant farmers in 1948 as a gesture
toward the socialism that he advocates. He has extended his own
influence in Lebanese affairs far beyond the scope that might be
allotted to the leader of a small and reclusive sect by champion-
ing every important radical movement that has appeared on the
Lebanese scene. He is probably more responsible than any other
politician for the rise of an indigenous left-wing reform spirit in
Lebanese politics. At the same time his personal behavior consti-
tutes the greatest single limitation on the institutionalization of
that spirit. If Kamal Jumblat is idealism incarnate, his political
behavior is erratically pragmatic.
Kamal Jumblat lives in the family palace, a splendid old struc-
ture with delicate arches and high ceilings perched on the rugged
hills of the Chouf. Jumblat’s mother is remembered throughout
Lebanon as one of the most astute and influential politicians of
the Mandate era (through her close association with the French).”
Young Jumblat received his early education at the French Lazarist
College and, according to some, was converted to Catholicism at
that time. He studied social philosophy at the Sorbonne from 1943
to 1947 and took a law degree from the Jesuit Université de St.
Joseph in Beirut in 1942. Elected at age twenty-six to the 1943
Parliament as a supporter of the French-backed Emile Edde,
Jumblat embarked on his eventful political career.
Scarcely had he been elected when the independence crisis with
France broke out; it caused him to disown his affiliation with
Emile Edde. Appalled at the fast-growing corruption in the Khoury
regime, he used his appointment to the Cabinet (as Minister of
National Economy) in 1946 to galvanize the opposition. At the
time when the P.P.S. was making its postwar comeback, Jumblat
considered joining forces with it. Instead, he formed his own
Progressive Socialist Party. In 1951 his Socialist National Front,
which included representatives of other groups opposing the
Khoury regime, won four seats from the area of his traditional
following, and a year later it engineered the President’s resignation.
In 1953 he lashed out at United States imperialism in the Middle
East, and it was reported that he had negotiated an alliance with
the Kataeb. He quarreled with his former ally Chamoun and
worked as part of the insurgent group in 1958. Although he sup-
ported the mildly progressive regime of General Chehab, he quar-

=== PDF_PAGE 205 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 185
reled with a Prime Minister, Saeb Salam, and tried diligently to
build up a broad socialist front, including the leftist labor unions,
the Communist Party, and the Arab nationalists.
Jumblat’s tendency to wander all over the radical side of the
political spectrum belies a basic consistency in his political per-
spective. Jumblat is an idealist searching for harmony and purity
in human affairs. The ironies of fate have placed him in a chaotic
situation. At the age of ten or twelve, Jumblat had a prophetic
vision of a new world. Gradually the outline of the future became
clearer: Brotherhood, solidarity, and equality would replace dis-
order and egoism. Jumblat was determined to struggle for harmony
and morality in Lebanese life and to destroy a politics based on
constantly shifting private interests.*° Jumblat’s description of the
current Lebanese political scene is one of Hobbesian anarchy: A
Parliament full of smugglers and thieves is surrounded by corrupt
bureaucrats and selfish politicians, and imperialist embassies plot
ceaselessly against the true interests of the country. In his vision
of Lebanese politics there is no rule of law, and the only order is
the result of a stand-off among rival interests. Although he puts
it more pungently, his interpretation is similar to the imagery of
struggle, insecurity, and delicate balance that so many other no-
tables hold.
That Jumblat has been an unusually disruptive force in Lebanese
politics is by no means accidental; his avowed purpose has been
to clear away the imperfect old system for the newer, more just,
and more orderly one.
Jestime d’ailleurs personellement que lAsie—cette terre du Christ,
de Mahomet, de Confucius et de Bouddha—a quelque chose d’originel
4 donner au monde, quelque chose autre qu’un matérialisme bourgeois
ou dialectique, une dictature de race, de continent ou de classe, autre
chose aussi qu’une formule de simple compromis qui est un leurre,
une injustice perpétuée et une honte. C’est une conception d’harmonie
sociale et humaine totale qu’il s’agit de réaliser.**
It is necessary to expose the decay in present Lebanese society if
a better society is to be created, Jumblat states. It is also necessary
to make some compromises with the decadent social milieu if
anything effective is to be done to transform it. These reasons
allow Jumblat to call himself a “practical idealist” and to justify
his rather startling political switches. Although he concedes that
his Progressive Socialist Party has not yet fulfilled his expecta-

=== PDF_PAGE 206 ===
186 * ACTORS
tions, Jumblat hopes that he has managed to inculcate the Lebanese
people with new ideals and to generate a concern for the public
interest, which has always been lacking in Lebanon. A desire to
stimulate public concern explains why Jumblat speaks frequently
about strengthening the traditional family life at the same time
that he urges sweeping educational reforms that will develop the
mentality of the people. The same goal explains his attacks on
the decadence of Beirut—its youth, its night clubs, its easy at-
mosphere—and his need to set a personal example of asceticism
by practicing yoga.
To Jumblat, nationalism in the narrow nineteenth-century con-
ception cannot achieve the social ideal, but modern Arab na-
tionalism, which has a humanistic aspect, can bring about such a
state. Since about 1956, he has become an advocate of a humanistic
Arab nationalism, as opposed to “selfish” Lebanese or Syrian na-
tionalism, as long as it does not conflict with his ideals in interna-
tional affairs: nonalignment, an international moral force, and an
organized Third World that can mediate between the great power
blocs. The place of the political entity Lebanon in this order is not
entirely clear, but there is reason to think that Jumblat does not
value it very highly. Jumblat’s ideal Lebanon is nonpolitical and
radically different from the present-day Republic.
Why is Jumblat important? In his peculiar way he has forced
the establishment to consider ideas that most of its members find
alien or utopian. The more sophisticated politicians openly ridicule
his inconsistencies, but he is still the only authentically Lebanese
reformer. He is also Lebanese in his eclecticism. He borrows un-
abashedly from East and West alike to create a philosophy for rec-
onciling Lebanon’s cultural and political schizophrenia. In his own
words, he has a dual personality, representing simultaneously the
antagonistic forces of tradition and modernity, of old values and new
techniques. It cannot be said that Jumblat is entirely successful in
trying to harmonize these forces; and in pursuing his goals he has
acted too often arbitrarily and unpredictably in his efforts to secure
a loyal following. He too is afflicted with an inability to organize
politically.
In the first years of the Progressive Socialist Party the progressive
side of its philosophy attracted a number of outstanding young politi-
cal activists because it was the only alternative to establishment
politics that did not involve the dangers of fascism, personality cults,
or sectarianism. At the same time, because its leader was one of

=== PDF_PAGE 207 ===
The Radical Outsiders » 187
the indispensable traditional leaders by virtue of his chieftainship of
an important Druze community, it had the kind of access to
Lebanese institutions that no other radical organization has en-
joyed. It was no wonder that the P.S.P., during its first six years,
was the best hope for the new elite. More than any other party it
seemed to have the potentiality for joining the old and the new in
Lebanese politics.
Founded in 1949 after negotiations between Kamal Jumblat and
the P.P.S. had failed, the P.S.P. and several less permanent organi-
zations emerged out of the growing opposition to the Khoury regime.
The P.S.P. attracted disaffected young professionals from all sects.
The establishment opposition press welcomed the new party as a
healthy addition to the political scene, a modern institutionalized
base for the landed notable Jumblat, who had already done a great
deal of good in combating the administrative excesses in the Khoury
machine.
A former high official in the party believes that the P.S.P. attained
its greatest strength, 18,000 card-carrying and dues-paying mem-
bers, in 1953. Membership fell rapidly, however, as the gulf be-
tween Jumblat and the new President Camille Chamoun, erstwhile
allies, widened over the extent of domestic reforms. Primarily be-
cause of pressures from the regime, membership had dropped by
1957 to between 10,000 and 12,000. * In 1959 party officials re-
ported a membership of 10,000, but a less biased estimate made in
1962 placed membership at between 4,000 and 6,000, of whom a
great many do not pay dues.** The majority of the party rank and
file is Druze, a fact reflected in election returns, which show that the
party’s strength is primarily in the Chouf, the zone of Jumblat’s tra-
ditional influence. P.S.P. candidates also win a seat or two from the
Biga and Beirut, but in both cases the victors are either Druze
or supported by a Druze voting bloc.** It is not easy to tell whether
those listed on Jumblat’s ticket are party colleagues in the most
formal sense or just traditional clients. A much more serious attri-
tion of the party’s intellectual cadre has paralleled the decline in
general membership. Five important intellectuals left the party in
1956 as the result of Jumblat’s relative reluctance to commit the
party wholeheartedly to the Arab nationalist struggle, despite his
previous public support for the Arab effort in Palestine and _ his
frequent denunciations of Western imperialism.”
After the 1958 crisis another power in the party, Nassim Majda-
lani, who had been with the P.S.P. since 1951, resigned as a vice-

=== PDF_PAGE 208 ===
188 * ACTORS
president (Jumblat never accepted the letter of resignation) because
Jumblat wanted to import “outside models” of socialism that
Majdalani felt were ill suited to the peculiarities of Lebanon. Majda-
lani says that Jumblat also sought to short-circuit the democratic
mechanisms within the party and eventually began to dictate to the
party’s political bureau, whose decisions the president of the party
is supposed to execute.** The party, which in 1951 held a promise
of success because it was well organized and not yet cursed with
sectarianism, had originally led Majdalani to leave the Greek Ortho-
dox Ghassanides organizations that he had founded in 1943 for the
purpose of strengthening the Christian commitment to Arab na-
tionalism.
Although the P.S.P. excels in the formulation of ideology, it has
stumbled in organization. In its peak years—the early 1950s—its
18,000 members were mobilized by 220 committees throughout the
country, of which 14 operated in Beirut. Members were carefully
recruited, and they had to take affiliate status before they could
become full members. The rank and file were organized in sections
that had between ten and fifty members each, linked through inter-
mediate committees to the party’s national assembly, which in
theory elected the policy council and the party president. During
the 1958 crisis the party was still strong enough to organize supply
lines from the insurgents outside Beirut to their colleagues inside the
city. When the Christian rank and file (mostly Greek Orthodox)
followed its leaders out of the party after 1958, the meager replace-
ments were mostly Druze, and soon the party’s national assembly
was more than 90 per cent Druze.
Even though Kamal Jumblat strongly supported the relatively pro-
gressive programs of the Chehab regime, the more favorable official
climate has not been enough to revive the party’s organizational
strength.** During the Chehab regime, the party was both in the
government and in opposition to that government at the same time,
a situation that did not make the most of the less adverse official
climate. Perhaps only in Lebanon is such a paradoxical situation
normal. In any event, when the P.S.P. tries to extend its influence
among the labor unions the security forces openly harass its labor
candidates. This harassment occurred even when Jumblat was In-
terior Minister. A party official readily admitted that the state of
the party in the 1960s is not what it used to be or what it ought to
be, for it has offices only in Beirut, Tripoli, Batroun, Aley, and a

=== PDF_PAGE 209 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 189
few other towns; he blamed the party’s troubles entirely on govern-
mental blackmail and intimidation.
Cynics sometimes say that the Progressive Socialist Party is not
Progressive, not socialist, and not a party. There is some truth in
such exaggerations. Whatever successes the party has enjoyed are
due less to its espousal of progressive socialism than to its calls for
moral reform. The element of humanistic idealism in the party’s
stance comes from Kamal Jumblat himself, who, as has been sug-
gested, is a man of ascetic vision, mysticism, and ambiguity. In the
broadest perspective the P.S.P. stands for a new democracy. One
may ask what “new democracy” is. Its economic component may be
summed up in the slogan “Bread and labor in justice and liberty,”
which means realizing the fundamental principle, “From each ac-
cording to his abilities, to each according to his needs.” ** Its social
component rests upon the definition by Henri Bergson: a community
of voluntary obedience to an elite of innately superior intelligence
and virtue.*® The chief characteristic of this social order is what
Jumblat calls the democratic principle par excellence: basic equality
of rights and obligations. The political component of the party’s
beliefs involves the creation of institutions for the realization of the
essential harmony of man in society and nature: “La Démocratie
politique est une entreprise de la Raison appliquée aux relations qui
peuvent surgir dans la Société entre ’homme et homme .. . la
Démocratie est donc une oeuvre de sapiens, de science, c.a.d. de
Sagesse.” *° To achieve this new order in Lebanon, the P.S.P. ad-
vocates programs for the full development of man, the enrichment
of family life in a society beyond the class struggle, the elevation of
intellectual life, improvement of public health and sanitation, and a
planned economy with equitable distribution of income. It calls for
the adoption of a bill of rights as a prologue to the Lebanese Con-
stitution, for electoral and administrative reforms, and for the aboli-
tion of political sectarianism.**
In theory, the foreign-policy position of the P.S.P. is consistent
with that of the National Pact. Kamal Jumblat says that the rule of
friendship with both the Arabs and the West but alignment with
neither that the Khoury regime followed was as sound as Khoury’s
domestic administration was weak.** The party supports world peace,
the United Nations Charter and Declaration, and the idea of a non-
aligned Third Force that gained currency after the 1955 Bandung
Conference.** In practice, however, the P.S.P. has moved increasingly

=== PDF_PAGE 210 ===
190 * ACTORS
away from the kind of lofty disdain that condemns all imperialism
and nationalism. The persistent American attempts “to organize
the defense of the area” and the emergence of progressive nationalist
leaders after the Suez crisis of 1956 have made international neutrality
an untenable policy for a party of strong moral convictions. For the
Progressive Socialist Party, however, morality resides not with
Washington but with the other side. The locus of political morality
has moved ever farther east since Suez: By 1965, it was in Peking.
The P.S.P. in the middle 1960s is, as its founder has said, more a
pressure group than a political party*—a reasonable assessment. As
a party it has failed as a device for achieving power through in-
stitutionalized procedures, as have all Lebanese parties with the
partial exception of the Kataeb. But there is no doubt that the party
—even through its mistakes—has influenced the generation of Leba-
nese politicians who will hold responsible positions in the 1970s.
The New Arab Nationalists
It is important to distinguish between new and old Arab nationalists
in Lebanon. There is hardly a Sunnite politician in the establish-
ment who does not claim to be an Arab nationalist of some kind,
but these are mostly the old Arab nationalists, oriented toward the
primary aims of achieving independence and establishing liberal con-
stitutional regimes. Several members of the Sulh family are among
the most prominent Arab nationalists of the old generation. Other
Beirut Sunnite notables who derive considerable popularity for their
support of Arab nationalism are Saeb Salam and Abdallah Yafi. In
North Lebanon the late Abdel-Hamid Karami and his son Rashid
laid claims to represent Arab nationalism. In addition, a number of
Christian, Shiite, and Druze notables profess Arab nationalism.
The younger generation of non-Maronite Lebanese Arabs, how-
ever, believe that these old Arab nationalists have left a bequest of
political failure and corruption. The young nationalists blame the old
generation because complete Arab unity has not yet been achieved.
In an age of socialism the older generation is merely liberal, and,
although the elders may have recognized the existence of new de-
mands, the new generation is not convinced for a moment that the
Lebanese equivalent of the Christmas turkey constitutes the proper
kind of social-welfare program. By far the heaviest liability for the
old generation, however, is the loss of Palestine. Fairly or unfairly,
the nationalist notables who were the mature leaders of the 1930s
and 1940s are saddled with this burden, and it has clouded the

=== PDF_PAGE 211 ===
The Radical Outsiders « 191
teputation of more than one of them. In Lebanon the conflict be-
tween generations is important because Lebanon has not yet joined
the ranks of the “liberated” Arab states. This claim is the young
nationalist way of saying that Lebanon is still under the control of
an establishment composed of non-Arab nationalists, anti-Arab na-
tionalists, and old-generation Arab nationalists.
The metamorphosis of Arab nationalism may be easily observed
in the case of one of Lebanon’s most important Sunnite families.
Members of the Sulh family, originally from Turkey, have repre-
sented nearly every shade of Arab nationalism in Lebanon. The most
famous Sulh of the older generation was Riad, who exercised great
influence with Lebanese Sunnites and supported the Arab cause
with distinction. To the end he remained an exponent of Arab unity
and tried his best to strengthen Lebanon’s ties with the Arab world.”
Sami Sulh, a cousin, rose to prominence on the eve of independence
and developed a devoted local following on the basis of his “com-
_ mon touch” and individual services. Looking back on the evolution
—such as it is—of Lebanese politics, Sami Sulh regrets somewhat
that contemporary politics are complicated with ideologies and pro-
grams and that it is no longer enough for a man simply to serve his
individual constituents well and to give people enough to eat.*®
Nevertheless, Sami Sulh has never changed his style, and he has
served both Bechara al-Khoury and Camille Chamoun. As Prime
Minister under Chamoun, Sami Sulh suffered the wrath of Sunnite
Arab nationalists, including two assassination attempts, and was ac-
cused of selling out to the United States. As a classical parochial
politician, Sami Sulh stands at the extreme right of the Sulh family’s
political spectrum. Squarely in the middle are Kazem and Takieddine
Sulh, founders and mainstays of the Nida al-Qawmi (National Ap-
peal), a group of liberal Arab-nationalist notables. This group was
active until the early 1950s, and it had an important role in integrat-
ing the Sunnites into Lebanese political life; but the revolutionary
changes that began to be felt in 1954 swept the Nida al-Qawmi
outside the mainstream of Lebanese politics. The Sulhs made the mis-
take of supporting the agreements that led to the Baghdad Pact
(even though they had opposed the American Middle East defense
plans of 1951). They failed to appreciate the fact that the new Arab
nationalism was anti-Western.*7 The obsolescence of the National
Appeal was apparent by 1957.** Looking back on the history of the
group, Takieddine Sulh finds that the youth no longer see anything
interesting in the National Appeal because they are hotheaded and

=== PDF_PAGE 212 ===
192 * ACTORS
extremist, searching for more sweeping and more disciplined ideol-
ogies and groups.*® The moderate Sulhs still play an important politi-
cal role, but they have clearly lost their hold on the Sunnites. In
recent years both Kazem and Takieddine have run for their Par-
liamentary seats in the Biga, profiting from the Christian votes in
Zahleh. The younger generation in the Sulh family has responded
directly to the changes that have occurred in the Arab-nationalist
movement. A nephew of Kazem and Takieddine, Munah Sulh, has
become active in the new Arab nationalism and expresses ideas re-
sembling those of the Baath.”
The Arab Nationalist Movement (A.N.M.)
It is obvious that the new generation Arab nationalists find their
position in contemporary Lebanese politics somewhat ambiguous.
Like the other radical mass organizations, the Arab nationalists and
their fraternal rival the Baath implicitly and sometimes explicitly
question the desirability of the Lebanese entity in its present form.
At the tactical level, of course, the new Arab nationalists, like the
other radical groups, place Lebanon in a “special category.” They
then go on to attack directly the conditions of this.special status—
sectarianism and traditionalism.
The Arab Nationalist Movement has taken many forms. Originally
—immediately after the Palestine war—the movement was entirely
clandestine. It was also opposed to the doctrinaire ideologies of the
other radical groups and thus rejected any elaborate philosophies.**
At that time it advocated Arab unity specifically for the sake of
liberating Palestine and developing the Arab nation, and its approach
was pragmatic. The subsequent years have shown that the process of
achieving Arab unity is far from simple and that pragmatism and
moral feeling are insufficient means to achieve it. The Arab Na-
tionalist Movement thus has been and still is searching for an effec-
tive ideology.” It has begun to create not one but a coalition of
organizations. In the middle 1960s the Arab nationalists’ activities
are both visible and clandestine, and, though the real leaders of the
movement are not popularly known, its spokesmen are. The move-
ment speaks through its own daily newspaper and weekly magazine.
The movement mobilizes students and professionals through clubs
like the Arab Culture Club and al-Urwa al-Wuthka, which has head-
quarters near the American University of Beirut. Following the riots
at the university in 1954, which protested the formation of the Bagh-
dad Pact, al-Urwa al-Wuthka was shut down, but it reopened in

=== PDF_PAGE 213 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 193
1962 a few blocks away from the campus. There is also a highly
articulate circle of professors, newspapermen, civil servants, and
other professionals that discusses, analyzes, and charts the direction
of the movement in general but avoids direct participation in Leba-
nese politics under normal circumstances.
At the popular level the shape of the Arab Nationalist Movement
in Lebanon cannot be charted precisely. One crude indicator is the
number of portraits of President Nasser; these are readily visible in
the Basta quarter of Beirut and in the predominantly Sunnite coastal
towns from Tyre to Tripoli. Organization in these areas is kept
relatively loose in order to avoid alarming the Lebanese authorities
and also to avoid complete destruction should its uneasy truce with
those authorities be broken. It is probable that the most highly dif-
ferentiated Arab nationalist groups are in South Lebanon. Tyre, for
example, is supposed to have a dues-paying membership and a policy-
making branch. In Saida the local political machinery has been
controlled since 1957 by Maarouf Saad, a burly ex-police officer.
Educated at the American school in Sidon, Saad fought in Palestine
in 1936, became a protégé of the old nationalist Riad Sulh, taught
athletics at the Magasid (Sunnite religious) school in Saida, and be-
came a follower of President Nasser in 1955, after the Soviet arms
deal. Capitalizing on the anger that Lebanon’s acceptance of the
Eisenhower Doctrine had aroused among the voters, Saad defeated
the government candidate in 1957 (in a none-too-gentle campaign)
and became a deputy, one of the few “men of the people” to enter
the Chamber. Arab nationalists are also found in the large Palestinian
refugee camps around Tyre, Saida, and Beirut, and the govern-
ment intelligence services are instructed to keep them under close
surveillance.
In Tripoli and Beirut pro-Nasser Arab nationalists have, inde-
pendently of the wishes of Sunnite notables, organized massive dem-
enstrations like the riots of 1965, which denounced the West Ger-
man decision to recognize Israel and the President of Tunisia for
his advocacy of containment rather than outright destruction of
Israel as a political entity? In Beirut the membership is said to be
mainly middle-class intellectuals, who pay dues ranging from 2 to
40 per cent of their incomes. One source close to the A.N.M. has
said that the Arab nationalists, although they can mobilize con-
siderable pressure in a crisis, are no more powerful than any other
political party in Lebanon. .
The philosophy of the Arab Nationalist Movement in Lebanon is

=== PDF_PAGE 214 ===
194 * ACTORS
as diffuse and ambiguous as its organization. In the years since the
Palestine war the goal of unity and retribution has remained the core
belief, but this goal has raised many subsidiary questions that have
yet to be answered satisfactorily. Such questions include, for ex-
ample, union from above or below? socialism before unity or after
it? federation or unitary state? a unified Islamic state or a secular
state? For Arab nationalists in general, time has shown these prob-
lems to be difficult, but for Arab nationalists in Lebanon they are
even more serious. The Lebanese entity and its present political in-
stitutions are incompatible with the purer ideas of Arab unity, and
any organization that works to establish new institutions is regarded
as potentially subversive by those who want to protect the present
entity and institutions. The older generation of Arab nationalists
solved the same dilemma that the new generation now faces by ac-
cepting the National Pact as a sufficient compromise. The context
of the middle 1960s, however, is not the context of the late 1930s,
and the National Pact is no longer regarded as the reasonable vic-
tory for Muslims that it seemed to be in an earlier period. This
change of attitude is increasingly evident today. For example, con-
servative Christians who opposed the National Pact in 1943 because
it granted too much to the Muslims defended it in 1958 as a last
line of defense for Christian prerogatives.°*
Today the spokesmen for the Arab Nationalist Movement speak
in general terms of “unity, freedom, and socialism” for an Arab
nation that extends in theory from Morocco to Kuwait. They also in-
sist that the Arab Nationalist Movement will never try to impose these
three goals on any people that does not wish it. Because a sizable
proportion of the Lebanese population clearly does not share these
three goals, the Arab nationalists regard their task as one of chang-
ing this opinion by peaceful means. They interpret their function as
education and persuasion and thus wish to be regarded today as a
pressure group rather than as a party that aims to obtain control of
the institutions of state. In an interview with the moderate, Christian-
owned newspaper, L’Orient, an Arab nationalist leader put his posi-
tion this way: “Au Liban, nous cherchons a présent 4 propager notre
doctrine; jusqu’au jour ot la majorité des Libanais croiront en
Pidée du Nationalisme Arabe. Alors seulement commencera notre
véritable action, que nous entreprendrons par toutes les voies demo-
cratiques.” °°
It will be difficult for Lebanese to determine when that day comes,
of course. There is still no general agreement on what would con-

=== PDF_PAGE 215 ===
The Radical Outsiders * 195
stitute a majority of the population. Furthermore, the fact that the
political system operates by concurrent rather than absolute majority
raises the difficult problem of what form unity would take. Certain
Lebanese Arab nationalists interviewed in 1965 argued that the cor-
rect form of Arab unity at this stage is not a unitary state, but a
loose federation in which individual states could if they wished
retain their distinctive form—for example, monarchy—but give up
sovereignty in foreign and economic policy. Although such an ar-
rangement might not leave many prerogatives for the member states
beyond routine administration, it would at least be an attempt to
Square the policy of the National Pact with Arab unity and to avoid
a direct collision with Lebanese sovereignty. The Kataeb and con-
servative Christian notables are not persuaded by such a formula-
tion, but there is still considerable political advantage in preserving
the appearance of support for the Lebanese political entity.
Arab nationalists deliberately sidestep these awkward questions
about unity, but they do not hesitate to exert their influence in
matters of government policy. In fact, they do constitute an effective
pressure group. Unlike the Kataeb they are not formally represented
within the establishment institutions, but like the Kataeb—and to a
greater extent—they exert influence in the form of an implicit threat
of violence and subversion. They exert more positive influence
through establishment notables who share—genuinely or for political
convenience—the basic emotional orientation of the Arab nation-
alists.
The new Arab nationalists are quite specific in their recommenda-
tions for Lebanon’s domestic and foreign policies once the latent
difficulties surrounding the unity problem are dismissed. Lebanon,
they concede willingly enough, is a land of the free economy, but
they feel that this economy is nothing to be proud of. A considerable
amount of the movement’s intellectual energy is spent in an attempt
to devise and propagate a socialism that would be appropriate for
Lebanon.*® Like the Communist Party, the P.S.P., the Baath, and
many articulate but unaffiliated new men of the left, the Arab na-
tionalists believe that Lebanon has a false prosperity and an artificial
economy. As one Arab nationalist put it, Lebanon—a country in
which the real power lies predominantly with the bankers—feeds on
the troubles of the oil-producing lands, drawing off their capital,
which is then put to socially unproductive uses. Instead of relying
upon foreign investment in land, buildings, and services for an uncer-
tain and maldistributed prosperity, Lebanon ought to have a

=== PDF_PAGE 216 ===
196 * ACTORS
planned, rational economy in which the condition of the very poor
—some 40 per cent of the population, according to criteria of the
Institut Internationale de Recherches et de Formation en Vue de
Développement (IRFED)—is alleviated through public policy. The
Lebanese government should interfere with the free economy in order
to direct the flow of capital toward more productive purposes. Banks
should be nationalized; speculation and borrowing beyond one’s
means should be curbed; interest rates should be controlled; a
bigger long-range development program should be undertaken. In-
stead of merely providing mild tax incentives for new business, gov-
ernment should actively subsidize light manufacture and modernize
agriculture. The Arab nationalists, however, state that land redis-
tribution is not necessary or generally desirable in Lebanon. Tariff
policy, they believe, should be used to ease foreign competition with
actual and potential local manufactures and not simply to protect
certain companies in which high officials may have a special interest.
They feel that a national health plan should replace the alleged
collusion between the Ministry of Health and pharmaceutical com-
panies. Of course, the Arab nationalists also subscribe to the
ubiquitous demand for curbing government corruption.
Arab nationalist leaders have exerted consistent pressure to bring
Lebanon into closer relations with an Arab world dominated by
the United Arab Republic (Egypt). As far back as 1943 Riad Sulh,
as the foremost Lebanese Arab nationalist, made an alliance with
Bechara al-Khoury because Khoury championed a policy em-
phasizing Lebanon’s basic Arab interests. In the two critical years
after independence the Khoury coalition was seriously strained by
conflict between the more militant nationalists, including Riad Sulh,
who sought to commit Lebanon to a common Arab policy under the
Alexandria Protocol, and liberal Christians who wanted friendship
but not domination. The Palestine war of 1948-1949 transformed
the Arab Nationalist Movement in Lebanon and everywhere else
into a movement marked by bitterness and disillusionment, despite
its positive emphasis on national development. The Khoury regime
initially survived the Palestine disaster, but the discontent it aroused
probably contributed to the President’s rapid decline in popularity.
His successor, Camille Chamoun, vigorously criticized Khoury’s
handling of the Palestine affair.°’ Chamoun’s honeymoon with the
new Arab nationalists was abruptly terminated, however, when
the Cold War became significant in Middle Eastern politics and
pan-Arabism arose in Egypt after 1954. Chamoun himself has

=== PDF_PAGE 217 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 197
vividly described how the Nasserite Arab nationalists succeeded in
arousing large areas of the countryside against him."
After Chamoun’s fall in 1958, however, the A.N.M. helped to
influence the Chehab regime's shift toward policies of greater friend-
ship with Egypt, participation in the Arab High Command, and close
cooperation with the “liberated” states. Intellectuals in the movement
_ praised the regime for having pursued the best possible course, given
Lebanon’s schizophrenic foreign policy problem. Short of the basic
dilemma that the goal of Arab unity presents, the Arab nationalists
have thus proven to be a potent foreign-policy pressure group.
The Baath
Although the Baath (the Arab Socialist Renaissance Party) shares
with the Arab Nationalist Movement a slogan, “unity, freedom, and
socialism” and a firm position on Palestine, there is a considerable
distance between these two currents of the new Arab nationalism. The
Baath existed in Syria as early as 1942, but it is relatively new to
Lebanon, where it developed out of the ferment of 1952. The Baath
disdained any immediate interest in Lebanese internal affairs because
its primary concern was developing a total and organic unity in the
Arab world, but it could not avoid competing for supporters among
the other radical left groups. Armed with an appealing ideology, it has
lured away important elements from the A.N.M., the Communists, and
the P.S.P. Many young A.N.M. members have decided that their own
movement is too primitive in a philosophic sense to command loyalty
and dedicated service. It is difficult, they find, to adhere slavishly to a
cult of the personality of President Nasser, particularly when the
pressures of his domestic and international problems cause him to
veer and maneuver in the revolutionary struggle. Baathist theory,
which is articulated primarily in the writings of Michel Aflaq, ap-
pears to supply a complete justification for Arab unity and an ex-
planation of the total context in which the rebirth of the once-great
Arab nation must take place.*® To Baathists it is clear that the re-
birth will come about only as the result of a truly revolutionary
event and that the substance of the new society is far more im-
portant than the form. Unity for the sake of unity is a shallow
slogan that can produce incorrect prescriptions for action. Socialism
and secularism, however, are indispensable, for through these con-
cepts alone can the genius and essential morality of the Arab nation
be realized.®
The certainty and comprehensiveness of Baath ideology exerts a

=== PDF_PAGE 218 ===
198 * ACTORS
strong pull on members of the Arab Nationalist Movement in all
countries, not only for the intrinsic merits it may have but also
because Arab nationalism in general needs a strong, binding, and
specific operational code. The Baath claims that it represents
genuine Arab nationalism and criticizes the Lebanese Arab Na-
tionalist Movement for its essentially reactionary character and for
its lack of a coherent ideology. The Baathists believe that it is
not enough simply to seek revenge for the loss of Palestine; there
must also be a positive doctrine. Lacking such a doctrine, the other
Arab nationalists are propelled into adventurism for the sake of
hollow unity. Even the socialism of the Nasserites—which Baathists
claim was borrowed from them—is imperfectly understood and
executed. To the Baathists true socialism is not the “state capitalism”
of Nasser’s Egypt but an arrangement under which the state con-
trols only production and the workers in the factories make their own
decisions and even set their own salaries.
Members of Kamal Jumblat’s Progressive Socialist Party have also
been vulnerable to the lure of the Baath. It will be recalled that the
P.S.P. lost important members of its own elite to the Baath in 1956
because the P.S.P. had been insufficiently loyal to. the Arab cause
during the Suez crisis and because Jumblat himself was too auto-
cratic and eccentric to be a real socialist leader.** The Baath has even
gained converts from the Communists, whose ideology is far more
tested and substantial. Since the 1958 crisis, when the Baath first
came to prominence on a mass level in Lebanon, it has moved into
areas that the Communists had long controlled through their in-
fluence in certain labor unions. The Baath has made inroads into
Communist strongholds among the port workers in Tripoli and the
tobacco workers around Nabatieh.
Although there is deep rivalry within the radical left in the middle
1960s, the Baath shares with the Arab nationalists, the socialists,
and the communists the same attitude toward Lebanon. In the words
of a leading Lebanese Baathist, the party wants to create a “recep-
tive atmosphere” toward the true Arab unity. The Baathists believe
that unity and socialism can never be achieved by coercing an im-
portant sector of the population that is not prepared for them, and
it is clear that most Lebanese Christians still equate Arab nationalism
with Islam. The Lebanese problem is compounded by the fact that
its political conflicts are “artificial,” complicated by sectarianism and
traditional particularism. They do not involve the “real” issue, which

=== PDF_PAGE 219 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 199
to the Baathists is the relationship between the dispossessed and the
exploiters. With a few exceptions, the middle and upper classes are
politically inert, unwilling to tamper with the status quo. Despite
these difficulties, the party rejects any notion of a “special status” for
Lebanon in an Arab union; and, because Lebanon’s present status—
sectarian and capitalist—is clearly unsatisfactory, one can only
conclude that sooner or later the party will have to persuade the
Lebanese that revolution is desirable. Such persuasion appears to be
a formidable task, but Baath theoreticians think it is within their
capacities. In their analysis of the political forces at work in
Lebanon they agree in general with the other radical groups. They
believe that a great deal more political consciousness exists in the
deprived lower classes than in the middle classes and that it is erod-
ing the particularism that has thus far delayed political progress.
According to the Baath, the lower classes—workers and many
peasants in the outlying areas—are not directly represented by the
establishment, but they are ready for political mobilization.
The guarded optimism of Baathist analysis is supported by the
growth pattern of the radical organizations in general but not by the
development of the Baath itself. Not until the post-Suez troubles
did the party begin to move beyond its elite constituency in Lebanon
and to acquire a mass following. A Baathist from Tripoli, Dr.
Abdel-Majid Rifahi, polled about 7,000 votes in the 1957 elections.
During the crisis of summer 1958, the Baath played a prominent role
in North Lebanon and—as mentioned earlier—began to branch out
into Baalbek, Saida, Tyre, Nabatieh, and Bint Jbeil. Its much
stronger showing in 1960 was, as one Baathist put it, “inflated” be-
cause in the spring of 1960 the ordinary voter still thought that the
Baath supported President Nasser. The breach between Nasser and
the Baath over the Syrian region, then a part of Nasser’s U.A.R.,
widened enormously after the coups and countercoups in Syria and
Iraq, and in 1964 the party did not even run a candidate. By 1965
the party was down to its “natural” size, which is estimated by one
non-Baathist observer at about 3,000 members. It is, however, a
more important political force than that figure indicates. For one
thing, the membership is well organized. The Baath has three stages
of membership: the supporter, the trained member, and the active
member. Because the party is under surveillance and arrests are
frequently made, however, general party meetings are impossible.
Furthermore, the Baath in Lebanon is only one branch of the In-

=== PDF_PAGE 220 ===
200 * ACTORS
ternational Baath Party. As long as the Baath is a popular force
elsewhere in the Arab world, the Lebanese authorities must treat
its Lebanese organization with circumspection.
ORGANIZING THE LEFT
There is a clear need to organize new radical forces in a manner
that will give them positive political effectiveness but will minimize—
if possible—their destructive characteristics. This need is more than
the collective self-interest of the new left; it also concerns the main-
tenance of the Republic itself. But the problems of organization are
enormous. Not only is there a problem in uniting the left tendencies
into a responsible and coherent organization, but there is also a
need to develop a role for the increasing number of politically con-
cerned but unorganized individuals. As we have seen, no single
radical group has succeeded in monopolizing all the potential sources
of opposition. Nor have the persistent attempts to establish a unified
opposition coalition front yet managed to produce a permanent popu-
lar and effective opposition. While he was Interior Minister in
1962-1963, Kamal Jumblat, the rhost persistent worker for a unified
opposition, tried for the third time since 1949 to establish a socialist
front by granting a license to an organization called the Labor
Liberation Front. Jumblat’s first two attempts—the Socialist National
Front of 1951-1952 and the National Front of 1957—1958—were
directed toward ousting the President and had been composed of
coalitions of notables. The Labor Liberation Front, however, was an
attempt to organize the left on a mass basis under the aegis of
Jumblat and his Progressive Socialist Party. The front used the mass
drawing power of the A.N.M. and the ideological support, for what-
ever it was worth, of the Communists. As its name implied, the
front sought to give the labor movement a politically active role,
using the illegal federation of seven Communist-dominated unions as
a core organization. Dismissed by the establishment as just another
of Jumblat’s eccentricities and attacked by the Baath as a plot
designed to isolate its own position, the Labor Liberation Front also
provoked the opposition of the orthodox labor movement, which
wished labor to remain strictly nonpolitical. In mid-1965 there was
a prolonged debate within the leftist press over the conditions for
cooperation among groups that had recently been openly attacking

=== PDF_PAGE 221 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 201
or privately ridiculing each other. Jumblat and the Arab nationalists,
whose followings constituted the main mass strength of this new
front, demanded that the Communists admit their error in opposing
Nasser and the Egyptian-Syrian union in 1958 and accept a policy
of “self-criticism” in the front.
Both the Moscow-oriented Communists and the Arab Nationalists
were disturbed by Jumblat’s warm pronouncements in favor of
Peking, and the Arab Nationalists were also displeased by his rela-
tively late and qualified espousal of nationalism. Despite these sus-
Picions, however, there was a core of agreement concerning the ex-
ploitation of workers and peasants at the hands of businessmen
whose enlightenment, the front claimed, is more verbal than real. In
1965 the leftists were attempting to consolidate their unity through
concerted attacks on American policy, whether in Vietnam or in
Lebanon. They staged a mass meeting in a Beirut movie theater
to protest, among other things, a proposed treaty under which the
United States government would guarantee United States capital in-
vestments in Lebanon.*® Kamal Jumblat also sponsored rallies in
several mountain villages badly affected by lack of markets for their
apples and used each occasion to call for more vigorous research,
production, and marketing efforts by the government.”
Nobody can be sure whether or not this effort at organizing the
left will eventually succeed in altering the balance of forces in the
establishment. The nationalists and socialists complain about ob-
jective conditions that are by no means imaginary. Nevertheless,
their road is hard. As long as there is growing prosperity in the
middle and upper levels, many new professionals will be diverted
from political involvement, particularly involvement with radicals.
The new doctor is interested in setting up a clinic in Beirut; the new
engineer in getting work with an American firm; the new intellectual
in pursuing his graduate studies abroad. They have no wish to be-
come mired in the immobilisme of local politics. One highly edu-
cated, socially conscious Druze—an admirer of Kamal Jumblat—
said that, although Jumblat is a good man, his socialism is capri-
cious and inappropriate to Lebanon, and his associates of the left
are a mixture of scoundrels and opportunists. He would vote in the
parliamentary district against a candidate whom he considered par-
ticularly corrupt, but he felt that it is impossible to do more because
real power is confined to the small circle that shares control of the
administrative apparatus. The only kind of pressure outsiders can

=== PDF_PAGE 222 ===
202 * ACTORS
bring to bear is coercive, through demonstrations or the threat of
demonstrations; and this kind of activity cannot be undertaken
lightly.
Another problem for the left is recruiting those people who are
willing to act individually but unwilling to establish or participate
in a political organization. One man, for example, who has an Ameri-
can Ph.D. degree, believed that in 1965 there were no serious,
rational, open reform movements. Although highly critical of the
failure of the administration to tap the talent necessary to undertake
the broader responsibilities of the times, he complained that he
has no organized means of access to the powers that might consider
his recommendations. As a Sunnite he would never join the Kataeb,
even if the Kataeb were an effective vehicle for progressive reform, as
a nonsocialist and an anticommunist, he would not care to associate
with the Jumblat group. The only realistic hope for the moderate
progressives, he suggested, would be the appearance of an outstanding
man in the Presidency, because a strong executive could independently
influence the Parliament and notables and would have the capability
of acting progressively.
In short, although Lebanon is developing an increasingly articulate
left and although this left may become well organized, there is one gap
between the left and the organs of responsible power and another be-
tween the parties of radical coloration and the moderate progressive
Opposition opinion.

=== PDF_PAGE 223 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 203
NOTES
Mohammed Majzoub, Le Liban et lOrient Arabe; 1943-1956 (Aix-en-
Provence: La Pensée Universitaire, 1956), pp. 94-5, gives 1934 as the date.
A little book, The Principles and Aims of the Syrian National Party,
Interpreted by the Leader (U.S.A.: Fast Printing Service, 1943), states,
however, that the principles were first articulated in 1932 and published in
_ Newspapers in 1935 and in various books in 1936, 1939, and 1943. A’ study
by Nadim K. Makdisi, “The Syrian National Party: A Case Study of the
First Inroads of National Socialism in the Arab World” (Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, American University, Washington, D.C., 1959), p. 16,
states that the party was officially founded on November 16, 1932, and that
it was not until November 21, 1934, that Saadeh wrote his basic doctrines.
? In later declarations, Cyprus and Kuwait were added to the Syrian nation.
3 Principles and Aims, pp. 1-11.
oe fs, Pn ee
5 There seems to have been no connection between the P.P.S. and the
German Nazi Party itself, though Michael W. Suleiman, Political Parties in
Lebanon (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967), p. 94, reports that Antoun
Saadeh had allegedly visited Nazi leaders in Berlin in 1938. The German
Nazis did, however, try to establish themselves in the Levant during the
1930s. A small group, which was linked to an active Nazi Party in Haifa,
appeared in Beirut late in 1933. The Beirut branch was founded by an
itinerant Nazi agent, who was the principal of the royal public school at
Kabul. There were six members in Beirut, led by an ex-officer of the German
Imperial Navy. The Nazis supported Arab, not Syrian, nationalism. H. D.
Schmidt, “The Nazi Party in Palestine and the Levant, 1932-1939,” Inter-
national Affairs, 27 (October 1954), 460-9.
® Testimony of Abdallah Saadeh, L’Orient, June 20, 1962, p. 9.
7Le Jour, June 10-22, 1949. See also Eugénie Elie Abouchdid, Thirty
Years of Lebanon and Syria: 1917-1947 (Beirut: Sader-Rihani, 1948), pp.
77-8; Bahige B. Tabbarah, Les Forces Politiques Actuelles au Liban (Un-
published doctoral dissertation, University of Grenoble, 1956), pp. 267-8;
and Suleiman, op. cit., pp. 96—7.
8 Te Jour, July 9, 1947. The Zaim regime delivered Saadeh to the Leba-
nese authorities in apparent betrayal of the bargain struck earlier between
the head of the P.P.S. and the Syrian dictator. Patrick Seale, The Struggle
for Syria (London: Oxford, 1965), pp. 69-71.
®Lucien George and Toufic Mokdessi, Les Partis Libanais en 1959 (Bei-
rut: L’Orient-al-Jaryda, 1959), p. 53. See also Majzoub, op. cit., pp. 94-100;
Makdisi, op. cit., passim; and Tabbarah, op. cit., pp. 265-75.
10 Testimony of Muhammad Baalbaki at the Putsch trial, L’Orient, June 22,
1962. Suspicions of British complicity were heightened when the govern-
ment expelled the British editor of the English-language paper Beirut, whose
publishing house also printed the party organ of Camille Chamoun. Arab
World Opinion, January 24, 1962. There were also unconfirmed reports
that a British warship was cruising off the Lebanese coast. Kamal Jumblat

=== PDF_PAGE 224 ===
204 * ACTORS
charged that the British Middle East Center for Arabic Studies at Shimlan
in Mount Lebanon was a spy center and that former President Chamoun
had visited it before the coup.
11“The causes of the Putsch arise entirely out of the internal political
situation. They do not come, contrary to the statement in the indictment,
from any idea foreign to Lebanon. Our goal was to bring about moderately
leftist reforms and the rebirth of society, to introduce social justice and
authentic democracy, to raise the standard of living in every region of the
country. We wanted to deliver the poor from misery, want, and disease.”
Trial testimony, L’Orient, June 20, 1962.
12 Trial testimony, L’Orient, June 17, 1962.
13 “AIc te d’Accusation dans l’Affaire du Complot PPS du 31 Decembre
1961,” L’Orient, May 10, 1962.
14 For example, on the eve of the 1949 P.P.S. crisis, the Kataeb gave a
dinner in honor of Dr. Anis Saghir, Chief of the Najjadeh. Le Jour, June 9,
1949,
15 Interview with Adnan Hakim, June 11, 1962.
16 Tt even gives grudging approval to what the party chief of its rival, the
Kataeb, has done as Minister of Public Works. Interview with Ramadan
Lawand, June 9, 1962.
17 Suleiman, op. cit., pp. 174-81. Some members of the Muslim Brother-
hood, however, were arrested for illegal political activity in 1966.
18 Ibid., pp. 182-5.
19 [bid., pp. 57-62 ff., which corrects W. Z. Laqueur, Communism and
Nationalism in the Middle East (New York: Praeger, 1956), on several points.
20 Suleiman, op. cit., pp. 65-6.
21 Khaled Bakdash, La Charte National du Parti Communiste en Syrie et
au Liban (Beirut: Saout ul-Chaab, 1944), pp. 9 ff.
22 Tbid., p. 43, which cites Joseph Stalin, Marxism and the National and
Colonial Question, and pp. 45-6, Articles VII, X, XIII, XV, XVI, XVII, XIX.
23 Ibid., pp. 23-5.
°4 The party leader, Farjallah Helou (no close relation to Charles Helou),
received more than 10,000 votes in Mount Lebanon, which, although the
vote was less than one-third that of the winners, was still better than the
electoral showing of Shaykh Selim al-Khoury’s Neo-Destour list—nine men
were elected out of seventeen candidates. Helou also did almost as well as
other such party representatives in Mount Lebanon as Elias Rababi of the
Kataeb and Assaad Ashkar of the P.P.S.
2° George and Mokdessi, op. cit., p. 76.
26 Size estimates are from a labor leader. See also Samir Khalaf, Mana-
gerial Ideology and Industrial Conflict in Lebanon (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Princeton University, 1963), p. 259. Two unions in the Feder-
ation of Labor Unions of North Lebanon are also Communist dominated.
2" Ibid., pp. 73-5. In 1955, 208 disputes were brought before the Con-
ciliation Board of Beirut, part of the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs;
in 1960 the board handled 1,015 disputes. There were four strikes in 1955
and thirty-four in 1960. It might be noted that 1960 was an unusually bad
year and that the number of strikes declined until 1964.
28 The New York Times, May 26, 1947, p. 7.

=== PDF_PAGE 225 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 205
»* Iskandar Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d (Beirut: Maktabat al-‘arfan, 1953), pp.
95-9. Cf. Camille Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris: Gallimard,
1963), pp. 390-3.
30 Interview, July 17, 1965.
31 “J personally believe, besides, that Asia—this land of Christ, of Mu-
hammad, of Confucius, and of Buddha—has something original to give to
the world, something other than bourgeois or dialectical materialism, than
a dictatorship of race, continent, or class. It is, in addition, something other
than a formula of simple compromise, which is a trap, a continued injustice,
and a disgrace. This unique contribution is a conception of total social
harmony that must be converted into reality.” Kamal Jumblat, Citoyen
Libre et Peuple Heureux (Beirut: Dar al-Kachaff, n.d.), pp. 5-6.
32 Interview with Nassim Majdalani, July 24, 1962.
3A party officer (also in 1962) claimed a membership of 15,000 or
16,000, which he said was comparable to the membership of the Kataeb.
Such discrepancies indicate the sizable margin of error in quantitative data on
Lebanese politics.
34 A former member of the P.S.P., Jibran Majdalani, who subsequently
became an important figure in the Lebanese branch of the Baath party,
joined the P.S.P. “unofficially” before the Khoury regime was ousted and
“officially” after President Chamoun’s election. He stated that he had not
heard of the Baath at that time and that he saw the P.S.P. as the only
alternative for a young socialist and nationalist. He and his fellow defectors
attributed many of their grievances with the P.S.P. to its leader’s quixotic
and arbitrary command. Interview, Juty 1:2;<1965.
35 In 1953 Jumblat said that his opposition to the proposed Western de-
fense pact had prompted a foreign intelligence service to attempt to bribe
him to desist. L’Orient, July 15, 1963.
36 Interview with Nassim Majdalani, July 24, 1962. Nassim Majdalani, the
banker, should not be confused with his distant relative, Jibran Majdalani,
the lawyer and Baathist leader.
87JIn 1962 Jumblat, as a member of the government, found himself in
the unfamiliar position of supporting the regime instead of attacking it.
Although the content of the Chehab program did not approach his own
socialist goals, he felt that it was, in Lebanese terms, a big step in the right
direction. Interview, May 2, 1962. Two years later Jumblat strongly sup-
ported the unsuccessful attempt to renew Chehab’s mandate.
38 Kamal Jumblat, Démocratie Nouvelle [Lectures Delivered Between 1950
and 1955] (Beirut: n.d.), pp. 8, 9.
39 Ibid., pp. 21-3. Jumblat rejects simple majoritarian theories that exalt
the ignorant masses. He believes that the elite owes its legitimacy not to
an assembly of bavards but to its natural obligation to develop civilization
and a better life. “C’est donc 4 un ordre social qui permette la révélation
des véritables Chefs—a tous les échelons de la collectivité—c’est 4 dire, a
un ordre qui assurera la meilleure organisation possible et l’efficience maxime
de !’'Economique, du Social, du Politique, c’est 4 un ordre semblable que
nous devons nous rapporter pour réaliser la véritable Démocratie Sociale”
(0222). , ‘
[“It is then to a social order that permits the appearance of genuine

=== PDF_PAGE 226 ===
206 * ACTORS
leadership, at every level of the community, that is, to an order that will
assure the best possible organization and maximum efficiency in the economy,
in society, in the polity—it is to such an order that we must attach our-
selves, in our effort to realize genuine social democracy.”]
40 “Political democracy is an effort to apply Reason to all the relations
between man and man that can arise in society . . . democracy is then a
work of intelligence, of science, that is to say, of wisdom.” Ibid., pp. 46-7.
41 Jumblat, op. cit., pp. 12-31.
Among the more specific policies the P.S.P. has advocated for achieving
these ends are the following:
—a judiciary and bureaucracy independent of politics
—strengthening the power of the executive
—an electoral law that makes voting obligatory, reduces the size of elec-
toral districts, and establishes judicial supervision of the elections
—the simplification and decentralization of the administration, with pro-
motions on the basis of merit
—establishment of obligatory medical assistance facilities in public insti-
tutions and private organizations employing more than ten people
—medical assistance on a cooperative or syndicate basis with state aid
—improvement of all techniques of production
—lowering living costs by reducing indirect taxes, stabilizing and increas-
ing real purchasing power
—suppression and confiscation of excess profits
—creation of a favorable climate for foreign investment
—harmonization of the relations between the factors of production by
the nationalization of all institutions that have a “collective char-
acter” or special importance; dividing great landholdings into small
parcels for the peasants; adapting a system of cooperatives.
42 Interview with Kamal Jumblat, July 17, 1965.
#3 Jumblat, Démocratie Nouvelle, pp. 79-87.
44 Interviews with Kamal Jumblat, May 2, 1962, and July 17, 1965.
‘Tt is regrettable that Riad Sulh, the most prominent non-Christian poli-
tician of Lebanon, left no memoirs. See the reminiscences of his daughter
Alia Sulh in Le Jour (Summer and Autumn 1965).
46 Interview with Sami Sulh, August 2, 1965.
47 Majzoub, op. cit., pp. 106-7.
48 Ali Bazzi, nominally a member of the National Appeal, won a Shiite
seat from South Lebanon in 1957, but his victory and subsequent re-election
were the result primarily of his own efforts and not of help from the Sulhs.
49 Interview with Takieddine Sulh, May 30, 1962. He recalls a discussion
with Michel Aflaq of the Baath, who told him that the youth is rallying
to Arab socialism; Sulh replied that the National Appeal would attract them
after they had grown up.
50 Interview with Munah Sulh, May 30, 1962.
5! George and Mokdessi, op. cit., pp. 47-9.
52 Hazem Zaki Nuseibeh, The Ideas of Arab Nationalism (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1957), analyzes the origins and alternative forms of Arab

=== PDF_PAGE 227 ===
The Radical Outsiders + 207
nationalism in general. Samir Ahmad in “Nasser’s Arab Socialism: Its Place
in World Ideologies” (Unpublished paper, Harvard University Center for In-
ternational Affairs, February 1965) describes the philosophy upon which the
Arab nationalist movement draws heavily.
53 For detailed accounts of these demonstrations, see L’Orient, March 20—
2), 1965.
54 Such, for example, was the case with the National Bloc.
55 “In Lebanon, we are seeking at present to spread our doctrine, until the
day when the majority of Lebanese have come to believe in the idea of Arab
nationalism. Only then will our real work begin, work that we shall under-
take by all the democratic methods.” George and Mokdessi, op. cit., p. 50.
56 See, for example, the articles on this subject by Muhammad Kishaly
in the Arab nationalist weekly, al-Huriyyah, June 14 and 21, 1965.
57 Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 234-5.
58 Ibid., pp. 317-24, 349-53.
59 Michel Aflaq, Fi sabil al-ba‘th [In Behalf of the Renaissance] (Beirut:
Dar al-tali‘ah, 1959). A comprehensive description of Baath theory is out-
side the scope of this study, but an excellent analysis appears in Suleiman,
op. cit., pp. 121-55. See Middle East Journal, 13 (Spring 1959), 195-200,
for an English translation of the Baath Constitution. See also George and
Mokdessi, op. cit., pp. 31-2; and Gordon H. Torrey and John F. Devlin,
“Arab Socialism,” Journal of International Affairs, 19, No. 1 (1965), 47-62.
6° George and Mokdessi, op. cit., pp. 29, 32.
61 A leader in an Arab nationalist club interviewed in 1962 admitted that,
although the Arab nationalists could provide a few general principles, the
Baath was the source of the best theory. Some members of this club were
torn between commitment to President Nasser and to the intellectually chal-
lenging and militant Baath. A Lebanese Arab nationalist newspaperman in-
terviewed in 1965 argued that, although Nasser may not yet have achieved
the best socialism, he is on the road to socialism and has contributed more
to the Arab nation through the Egyptian experience than has Baathist
theorizing. Furthermore, he charged that the Baathists themselves do not
agree on the kind of socialism that ought to be introduced.
62 Interview with Jibran Majdalani, July 12, 1965. Jumblat, he said, is
essentially a Druze leader; otherwise he is indefinable.
63 Interview with Jibran Majdalani, July 21, 1965.
64 See, for example, “On Renewing the Lebanese Left and Uniting It,”
al-Hurriyyah, August 30, 1965, pp. 14-5. The Moscow-oriented Communists
spell out their position in a pamphlet, by a “socialist struggler,” On Some
Elementary Understandings for the Problems of Unifying the Socialist Forces
(Beirut: 19657).
6 See, for example, Mohsen Ibrahim in al-Huriyyah, July 12, 1965.
66 For an account, see al-Akhbar (Beirut Communist weekly), July 25,
1965. Speakers included prominent representatives of the Arab nationalists,
the Communists, and the Progressive Socialist Party.
67 One such rally, at the Druze village of Btichnay, prompted the con-
servative notables to sponsor a counterrally at which socialism was de-
nounced. See Kamal Jumblat in al-Anbd’, October 9, 1965, and Michel
Abujaoudeh’s commentary in al-Nahar.

=== PDF_PAGE 228 ===
>
