=== PDF_PAGE 231 ===
CHAPTER ° 6
Trends in Representation
Like the frail sapling in a strong wind, the Lebanese political system
bends under the pressures of environmental change, too flexible to
break yet not rooted deeply enough to stand. The secret of its
precarious survival is its very institutional weakness. This weakness
precludes complete political stagnation and requires incessant, though
superficial, change. At the same time, however, it retards the rapid
development of those aspects of political modernization—like broadly
based parties; a rationalized, efficient bureaucracy; and _ secular,
programatic, and centralized policy making—that might well destroy
the system of traditional balances. Lebanon has in this way avoided,
at least for the moment, the dilemma posed by its changing en-
vironment. The result has been an apparently stable short-run
equilibrium, for the independent Lebanese Republic has endured
for a full generation. In the long run, however, this equilibrium
may be unstable. Social modernization and regional ferment demand
political innovation, as well as adaptation, and those very aspects
of political modernization that are retarded by institutional weakness
are the keys to innovation. Lebanese politics is too complex, how-
ever, to be fitted easily into mutually exclusive dichotomous cate-
gories like “stagnant-dynamic,” “weak-strong,” and “traditional-
modern”; and existing theory provides little guidance in analyzing
short-run and long-run processes or stable and unstable equilibria.
Therefore, if Lebanese political performance is to be analyzed ade-
quately, it is necessary to go beyond classifying it in “either-or”
terms and to attempt to show how much and what kind of real
development are taking place within the rigid institutional frame-
work imposed by Lebanon’s fragmented political culture.
211

=== PDF_PAGE 232 ===
212 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
How, precisely, has the Republic thus far avoided the perils of
complete immobilism and destructive dynamism? It has done so
partly because its representative institutions function but do not
function very well. If there were no genuine representative institu-
tions in the Republic, it would surely lapse into primordial strife;
but if these institutions represented all the political tendencies ex-
isting in Lebanon in all their intensity, national life would be hardly
less chaotic. Instead, Lebanon’s representative institutions, exempli-
fied in this chapter by the electoral process, are highly restrictive,
yet they show a certain limited expansion in representation over
time. This chapter explores the narrow flexibility exhibited in the
electoral process and assesses its long-term prospects.
The functioning of the electoral process in Lebanon is marred
by official pressures, corruption, high campaign costs, lack of serious
debate, and absence of an organized party system. In terms of
Lebanon’s future these are serious defects. Yet with all these flaws,
and perhaps because of them, the electoral process contributes to
the country’s short-term political tranquillity. Tranquillity requires
that the traditional elements be given reasonable security, and the
electoral process helps to meet this need by guaranteeing places
to the notables who represent these elements. Every Parliament and
Cabinet is a complex microcosm of the families, clans, regional
interests, sects, and economic interests that have traditionally claimed
to represent the people of Lebanon. The electoral process thus in-
stitutionalizes traditional pluralism and excludes those who would
destroy this pluralism. Anyone who has observed the transforma-
tion of Lebanese society in recent years, however, must be dis-
turbed by a growing isolation of the politically relevant population
from the formal representative institutions. The nontraditional groups
and the unorganized, well-educated stratum are still generally ex-
cluded from “normal” political participation (through the repre-
sentative institutions). Although they may perhaps be dangerous
when they are included, they are an even greater threat when they
are excluded.
THE ELECTORAL MECHANISM
The contemporary Lebanese political culture (described in Chap-
ter 1) requires a fixed sectarian ratio of deputies in Parliament in
order to control sectarianism as a dimension of electoral competi-

=== PDF_PAGE 233 ===
Trends in Representation + 213
tion. In the same spirit, regions and districts are allocated enough
seats to represent them “fairly” in the Chamber and also to reflect
the sectarian balance within the constituency of each district. The
device for accomplishing this double basis of representation is the
list system. Usually, but not always, competing lists of candidates
will be formed for each district. These lists will be composed of
candidates for the various sectarian seats at stake in a particular
district. In general—but there are important exceptions—lists are
formed by the most powerful notable from the majority sect of
each region. The dynamics of local politics drive this notable to
find as co-listers for the minority sect seats those who will attract
the largest possible share of votes from those communities. The
potential co-listers, in turn, if they are ambitious, want to affiliate
with the most powerful notable of the majority sect. Typically, there
is thus a kind of mutual coattail effect both in the formation of a
list and in its performance on election day: The leader, especially
if he is not all-powerful in the dominant sect (he usually does not
have such an advantage) is grateful for the minority support his
co-listers may attract, and the lesser notables who cannot be con-
fident of winning even with the solid support of their sect need
the majority votes a strong notable can attract.
This arrangement has two important consequences for system
maintenance. It imposes a necessity to organize politically. In the
absence of strong parties, the notables of the area who are most
powerful locally and who have the most extensive clientele have
an advantage. The list system, especially in the early years of in-
dependence, has been a kind of gearbox, harmonizing a national
political system imposed by the French with the complexities of
traditional pluralism. The national political organizations, such as
they are, consist mainly of notables and their followings, especially
in North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and the Biqa—they are a tra-
ditionalist substitute for parties in establishment politics. The list
system in these areas also encourages a pattern of stable and com-
petitive bifactionalism. As long as the primary electoral organization
is the interlocking client group, the list system performs tolerably
well as an instrument of peaceful change.
The second consequence of the list system is the encouragement
of sectarian moderation. Although it is generally true that the major
sects are generally concentrated in particular regions, there is enough
geographical intermingling to permit the kind of districting that
creates politically significant minorities, given the fact that there

=== PDF_PAGE 234 ===
214 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
already is what amounts to proportional representation by sect.
In heavily Maronite Jbeil, for example, a substantial Shiite minority
tempers Christian extremism; in North Lebanon, Greek Orthodox
enclaves must figure in electoral calculations; in southern Mount
Lebanon, Druzes and Christians are sufficiently mixed to force even
such bitter enemies as Kamal Jumblat (Druze) and Camille Chamoun
(Maronite) to wage their struggles on a nonsectarian basis. The
list system gives security and political influence to the Maronites,
Greek Orthodox, and Catholic minorities in South Lebanon and the
Biga and to the Sunnite enclaves in Mount Lebanon and the Biqa.
In short, the list system imposes moderation by equipping sectarian
enclaves with political power. This arrangement has kept people
reasonably happy and secure.
The list system has also two basic disadvantages. Because it
harnesses traditional notables and their cliques to the state apparatus,
this electoral mechanism raises a barrier to the expanding politically
relevant elite. It cannot integrate many of the increasingly popular
movements into the formal governmental structures. Some of the
examples that follow show why individuals who cannot or will not
associate with a traditional list fail to break into the establishment.
Furthermore, because the list system perpetuates and reinforces the
local power of notables, it is extremely difficult to establish such
less archaic political organizations as parties. The individual who
wants to create a strong parliamentary party is faced with a frus-
trating chicken-egg problem: For success under the present circum-
stances, a party must include the same notables it seeks to dis-
place. It is only the liberal benevolence of some of the leaders
that permits the introduction of policy problems into a governmental
apparatus whose function is mainly the adjustment of competing
factions.
The second disadvantage is that the mechanism that encourages
sectarian moderation does so by exploiting sectarian tension. Sec-
tarian moderation in election campaigns is the product of latent fears
as to the consequences of immoderation. In the short run the con-
sequence is the risk of losing the election; in the long run it is the
threat of massive disorder. Under these circumstances the sectarian
distribution creates a strategic situation analogous to a system of
exchanging hostages or mutual deterrence in international politics.
The tangible benefits of this arrangement are visible in the Lebanon
of the 1960s: The country has prosperity, tranquillity, and charm.
The drawback is less visible but no less tangible: Sectarian identity

=== PDF_PAGE 235 ===
Trends in Representation + 215
is perpetuated and positive national unity correspondingly hindered
by the list system. In normal times this is not a great disadvantage—
it is certainly preferable to the insecurities that the abolition of fixed
proportions would breed—but, when crises arise, as they do all too
frequently in the twentieth-century Middle East, the old antagonisms
can reappear in a very ugly manner.
__ The electoral system exhibits the problem of the Lebanese politi-
cal system in general: the incapacity for significant change in a
highly delicate balance of power. That this delicacy imposes struc-
tural rigidity is apparent in Tables 11 and 12. The first depicts the
distribution of seats by religious sect.
TABLE 11
DISTRIBUTION OF PARLIAMENTARY SEATS
BY SeEcT, 1947-1964
Sect 1947 BOSL 1953 1957 1960 1964
Maronite 18 23 13 20 30 30
Greek Orthodox 6 8 5 7) 11 11
Greek Catholic 3 5 3 4 6 6
Armenian Orthodox 2 3 D} 3 4 4
Minorities 1 3 1 3 3
Sunnite 11 16 9 14 20 20
Shiite 0 14 8 12 19 19
Druze 4 5 3 4 6 6
Totals
Christian 30 42 24 36 54 54
Non-Christian 25 35 20 30 45 45
Grand Total 338) 14) 44 66 99 99
The proportion of parliamentary seats allotted to each sect remains
constant over time. More important, the distribution between Chris-
tians and non-Christians is always six to five, respectively. Maronites
receive about 30 per cent of all the seats and Sunnites 20 per cent.
These proportions are roughly those that prevailed in the legisla-
tures under the Mandate and were established by the census of
1932. When Dr. Ayoub Tabet attempted to increase the propor-
tion of Christian deputies in the Parliament of 1943, he precipi-
tated a serious crisis that resulted in his removal by the reluctant
French and the restoration of an acceptable ratio after strong
diplomatic pressure from the British.’ .
No President since then has sought to tamper with the propor-

=== PDF_PAGE 236 ===
216 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
tions, recognizing that to do so raises the whole problem of Leba-
non’s national identity. Nor has any ruler had the temerity to abol-
ish sectarian representation altogether. Change of this sort has been
ruled out, even though, as Chapter 2 suggested, the proportion of
Christians to non-Christians in the population today is probably no
longer six to five. Each province still retains roughly the same share
of seats, as Table 12 indicates. There is nothing particularly note-
TABLE 12
DISTRIBUTION OF PARLIAMENTARY SEATS AND DISTRICTS
BY REGION, 1947-1964
1947 1951 1953 1957 1960 1964
Region S* DIES DUNS DA St es ee) ae ee
Beirut Ox 13 eee, 7, De el 2 16 3 16 3
Mount bebanon a) t/a oe See ee 9 20 6 30 6 30 6
North Lebanon (PA al 16— 3 9 8 14 TAG f= 48) ¥
South Lebanon LOSS is law 8 Let 7 os Teas aT:
Biga (iis, a Seah 1 6 4 10 32 SiS 3
Total 55°- 5 Tie 9 ~44- 33> 66" 25, 499 265099 Seo
* S = seats.
+ D = districts.
worthy about such constancy except that two decades of migration
to Beirut have brought about a relative overrepresentation of the
rural areas. Because regional particularisms are still intense, there
has been no serious attempt to make any adjustments in the propor-
tion. Such then are the structural rigidities in the Lebanese electoral
system.
There has, however, been one structural modification during the
independence period—the only one, indeed, that the situation per-
mits. This change, like the few other important political changes
that have occurred, originated with the President of the Republic.
Each of Lebanon’s three independence Presidents enlarged the Par-
liament but always maintained the sectarian-regional proportions.
The simplest aspect of the change can be seen in Table 12. In
the period from 1947 to 1964, the Parliament increased in size
from fifty-five to ninety members. Although the number of
seats has not risen steadily, the number of identifiable factions com-
peting for them definitely has, as will be demonstrated shortly. The

=== PDF_PAGE 237 ===
Trends in Representation + 217
1947 elections, like the 1943 French-“supervised” elections, were
carried out under the system of the “Grand List,” in which each
of Lebanon’s five provinces was a single constituency. For example,
all the voters in South Lebanon would elect a slate of ten repre-
sentatives that would, by law, include six Shiites, one Sunnite, one
Maronite, one Greek Catholic, and one Greek Orthodox. Victory in
an electoral district the size of an entire province, with its diversity
of sects and big families, stimulated the formation of coalitions of
local notables, because the immediate parochial clienteles of indi-
vidual notables would not provide enough support to win. The sup-
port of other notables and of voters of the other sects was necessary
to win a particular seat. The most influential notables of a province
were thus impelled to organize multisectarian slates that they hoped
would win support from all the traditional groupings in the prov-
ince. Organizing such lists required substantial sums of money as
well as influence. Obtaining membership on a powerful notable’s
list could be crucial to an individual’s chances of victory, and it
required, of course, a certain loyalty to the organizer of the list.
Under this arrangement, a few notables—mainly landlords—wielded
influence beyond their immediate neighborhoods, and sectarian har-
mony was promoted. The Grand List system permitted a small
number of skilled leaders to consolidate Lebanon’s shaky independ-
ence. It also fostered electoral corruption because the notables were
more powerful in their domains than the government was; indeed,
the more powerful notables could heavily influence the government
officials in charge of the elections. Electoral corruption, further-
more, contributed to general administrative corruption, insofar as
it promoted the oligarchical tendencies of the system. This corrup-
tion, in turn, along with thwarted ambitions among some of the
leaders, stimulated the opposition. In order to reduce the relative
strength of his parliamentary opposition and to bring in more sup-
porters, President Khoury raised membership in the 1951 Parliament
to seventy-seven and abandoned the Grand List in Mount Lebanon
in favor of several smaller electoral districts. President Khoury thus
retained an overwhelming parliamentary majority and reduced the
scope of his opponents’ influence simultaneously. A year later, when
these measures proved inadequate and President Khoury had been
evicted from the Presidency, the new President, Camille Chamoun,
undertook the boldest electoral experiment of the time by abandon-
ing the Grand List system altogether and replacing it with thirty-
three small districts, of which twenty-two were for single members.

=== PDF_PAGE 238 ===
218 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
FIGURE 3. The President Prepares
Some Changes in the Cabinet and
Chamber of Deputies.
»
‘
«
%,
Bawa
This move reduced parliamentary membership to forty-four, and, in
President Chamoun’s words, “la qualité remplagait la quantité.” *
President Chamoun’s stated intention was to weaken the feudal
stranglehold on the political system and to end the grave electoral
abuses of the past. His unstated intention was to increase the power
of the President. The immediate results were mixed. Instead of weed-
ing out the most influential feudal leaders, he merely sacrificed their
less powerful colleagues, but he did succeed in dislodging the rem-
nants of the Constitutional Bloc. Four years later, when it was time
to elect a new Parliament, President Chamoun had accumulated a
set of problems arising both from the Suez crisis and from his tact-
less domestic politics. Chamoun’s awareness of the growing animosity
of his enemies (both members and affiliates of the old Constitutional
Bloc) was at least as important a factor in the President’s decision
to push through another electoral law as was any general wish for
reform. Under the new law, the number of deputies was increased
to sixty-six, and the newly elected Parliament was not only over-
whelmingly Chamounian but also purged of the President’s tradi-
tional enemies. The lines of the new districts had been carefully
drawn. Several leaders from South Lebanon, Mount Lebanon, and
Beirut, gerrymandered out of their customary seats, were con-
spicuous by their absence. These traditional leaders could not be
eliminated so abruptly, however, particularly when the President, in
the opinion of many, had violated the National Pact by associating
too closely with the West. President Chamoun’s strong-arm electoral
tactics in 1957 contributed substantially to the crisis of 1958.

=== PDF_PAGE 239 ===
Trends in Representation + 219
y
S
NN
f
$
4
WICH
F
When the civil war was over, the previous political status quo was
re-established; but the new President, Fuad Chehab, continued the
expansion of Parliament. He raised the membership to ninety-nine
(the number of districts was twenty-six), but the new law did not
Squeeze out any of the important establishment figures or tamper
with the sectarian balance. Instead, organized party representation
increased in numbers and the social composition of the membership
broadened somewhat. As suggested earlier, General Chehab may
have reasoned that the bigger Parliament is, the more unwieldy it
becomes, and the less trouble it gives: Let the representation of local
interests and new (but respectable) elements increase and at the
same time bring a sizable number of the traditional leaders into the
Cabinet and in so doing satisfy as many people as possible.
All three of postwar Lebanon’s Presidents expanded the Parlia-
ment as a representative institution, each for practical political pur-
poses. There was a common result in each case: The electoral process
became more fragmented and the pattern of political organizations
more complex.
INCREASING POPULAR INVOLVEMENT
The limited flexibility in the Lebanese electoral process is demon-
strated not only by the limited attempts at formal structural expan-
sion but also by the trends in voting participation, entry of new men,
and competitiveness. Regular elections and increasing voting partici-

=== PDF_PAGE 240 ===
220 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
pation are indicative of institutionalized mass participation, though
not necessarily of general stability. The whole electorate may vote,
but, if the same men keep getting re-elected or if the turnover rate
is very high, the high voting rates may simply be signs of unrest,
particularly in light of restrictive or corrupt electoral procedures.
It is thus necessary to consider how often new men get in and to
examine electoral contests for competitiveness. Because of Lebanon’s
religious and socioeconomic cleavages, it is also important to view
the three trends in terms of religious and regional-economic divisions.
Voting Participation
There is communal ritual in a Lebanese election campaign, and
voting statistics cannot adequately portray the popular involvement
it engenders. A few examples, however, may be helpful. Candidates
in the rural areas must spend large amounts of money to transport
voters who normally live in Beirut back to the villages where they
are registered. The candidates travel in caravans of cars, and each
candidate—in the American fashion—tries to shake as many hands
as possible. Frequently he borrows a large house in a village and
receives local notables and citizens, supplying, of course, a cup of
coffee to each visitor. In return for support, the candidate promises
more government aid for the village—new pavement for the road,
a telephone line, improvements in the electric supply, water-purifi-
cation programs. Distribution of government largesse is the basic
“issue” in a Lebanese parliamentary campaign. In Beirut, the tech-
nique is similar, though somewhat more mechanized. The buildings
are plastered with posters; illuminated portraits gaze down on crowded
intersections; banners bearing slogans are hung above the road-
ways. Especially inventive candidates have even hired airplanes to
distribute leaflets and display banners. In the parliamentary elec-
tions of 1943, 1947, and 1951, election day was chaotic, but Presi-
dent Chamoun in 1953 instituted the practice of holding elections
on successive Sundays in the various districts in order to give the
government more time to mobilize its security forces in case of vio-
lence. Opposition candidates have complained that the concentra-
tion of governmental and military influence, ostensibly to prevent
violence, is a form of intimidation, but the practice has been strength-
ened with time. The elections since the 1958 crisis have been carried
out in the more unruly districts of the North and Biqa under the
watchful supervision of gendarmes and soldiers.

=== PDF_PAGE 241 ===
Trends in Representation + 221
Whereas organized political parties play a distinctly minor role
in the electoral process, candidates take full advantage of the highly
developed traditional organizations as a means of furthering their
interests. In order to gain the backing of these organizations, the
candidate must cultivate the support of village priests or shaykhs,
heads of municipalities, mukhtars, and the heads of important fami-
lies. It is a complicated and delicate business, for the candidate
inevitably finds himself drawn into local and personal rivalries.
Corruption, nepotism, and favoritism are the preferred charges chroni-
cally leveled at deputies. In all probability, Lebanese deputies are
no more avaricious than legislators elsewhere, but they do incur a
bewildering variety of obligations on the road to Parliament. At
least one deputy has a large filing cabinet packed with pending com-
plaints, biographical data on constituents, and reports on projects
affecting his district. Letters from constituents are relatively rare, be-
cause legislators are generally easier to reach personally. Fence mend-
ing is probably the principal occupation of Lebanese deputies, but
candidates also rely on less visible means to win votes. In the tradi-
tional areas, both urban and rural, both Christian and non-Christian,
the candidate must somehow engage the services of local strong
men who have the power to deliver a certain number of votes or
withhold them. These “election keys,” like the ward bosses in old-
fashioned American urban machines, do not provide their services
without prospect of some benefit, financial or otherwise, in return.
Traditional leaders, even the most Europeanized, also engage squads
of young men to assist their campaigns, to act as bodyguards, and
to keep order if the opponents’ men should cause disturbances.
Disturbances, indeed, are frequent in Lebanese election campaigns
and have shown no sign of disappearing; and it is not uncommon
to read that one of a boss’s men has been beaten up or wounded—
sometimes killed—by men of the other side.
An impressive increase in the number of people voting between
1943 and 1964 suggests that the electoral process has engaged a
growing segment of the population and has acquainted most adult
Lebanese with orderly democratic processes. In the parliamentary
elections of spring 1964, Lebanese voters went to the polls in record
numbers. Voting turnout increased by 14 per cent over the totals
registered in the 1960 elections. This trend is by no means recent:
The voting population has been expanding rapidly since 1943, as
Table 13 shows.? Table 14 indicates that the voting increase trend
does not simply reflect the growth of population in general. Whereas

=== PDF_PAGE 242 ===
222 *
INSTITUTIONAL
PERFORMANCE
a
j o n u u p a s v i a
P
I 6 I - E P 6 L A S D a s 9 0 ' T O L O ' T 9 8 0 ' T L L O ' T T L O ' T S L O T
T
u t p u r { p 9 6 1
aL
p I
U
T
‘py
A
e
S N
O
P 9 6 I L E e 9 ‘ t 9 9 7 ' S L I € L O ' 8 9 1 S E e r ‘ o l l S L L ‘ 6 8 9 8 1 ° S 6 S ‘ g z ‘ S T T
H
I L d y
O A ‘ 0
T H A U
V
0 9 6 1 E P I L L O T ‘ L O L 6 0 ° 0 1 Z 1 S ° 6 6 O I L ‘ E L V 9 8 I T S 9 6 1 ‘ 8 A
e
L
N
A ‘ S
W V I T A V L 5 6 1 0 0 s * S 9 L 8 L ‘ v 7 1 9 v 7 0 0 I T E 8 ‘ E 8 C 6 8 T L 0 9 7 ‘ S b 6 1 “ L Z “
€ G O T
]
a l a v h
N
A A T S
N I
E S 6 T 0 9 9 ° T S L L 6 v e
l
7 8 0 ° 0 6 L O V S L 9 0 1 ' 8 Y T E G O 6 8
E
“ET
A p n e ‘LZ
u n
e
N
O ‘
I L V d I O I L I S 6 r 8 6 6 1 7 T E 6 1 9 S r 9 ' ° 8 t v I S ' S E O L O T E 6 8 € ° 6 6 1 1 S 6 1 “ 8 q u
Y d
U y
V
d ‘
O N I L
O
L r O I 6 6 S 1 7 S E L E S € 6 8 ° C E 6 L I ‘ 6 7 V E L T E E v e L O T 7 u a 1 4 0 , 7
u
A t
p
o
w
i
E r 6 I 6 c I T E T E E V C L 9 ° 6 7 V 6 E V T L 0 8 ‘ 0 7 8 7 9 6 7 1 o d e s o r e
m
“ L o l ‘ ¢
o
u
s o
m
n g
n‘
a I U I A O d y u I l 9 g u r e y u n o | Y O N y n o g e b i g
y
e u o r e N n
s y
[ e I o W O
L Z
A P “ n o r

=== PDF_PAGE 243 ===
Trends in Representation + 223
TABLE 14
VOTERS AS PERCENTAGE OF ESTIMATED TOTAL
ADULT POPULATION, 1943-1964 *
1943 1947 1951 1953 1957 1960 1964
26.4 D5 38.5 60.0 60.8 66.0 66.7
* The percentages are only rough approximations because the population estimates
are themselves only educated guesses. According to the Institut de Formation en
Vue du Développement (IRFED) population-age profile, 48 per cent of the popula-
tion is Over twenty years old, and these calculations are based on this figure.
Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités de Dévelop-
pement du Liban, I (Beirut: 1960-1961), 48.
the population increased by just over two-thirds between 1943 and
1964, the number of voters increased more than 4.5 times.*
The rate of voter increase is not smooth. In 1953 there was an
increase of some 190,000 voters over the 199,000 who voted in
1951—the voting population had nearly doubled. Whereas approxi-
mately 15 per cent of the entire population voted in 1951, about
29 per cent voted two years later. This voting explosion was a
direct result of President Chamoun’s electoral law of November 6,
1952. In addition to the redistricting already described, this law
gave the vote to women, made voting compulsory for men, and
instituted the secret ballot. Although the Chamoun regime later
disappointed many reformers and although the broadened suffrage
has yet to be exploited fully—women are still reluctant to go to the
polls—it did take a decisive step toward expanding the electoral
base of the country’s political institutions. The enlarged electorate
is accompanied by an increased number of factions, a differentiation
of rivalries, and a diminution of the once-tight control exercised by
the notables and officials.
When the voting-participation trend is broken down by region, a
familiar yet curious pattern emerges. The voting-increase rate of
the “backward” rural areas between 1943 and 1964 exceeds that
of Beirut and Mount Lebanon, according to the logarithmic calcu-
lations presented in Table 13. North Lebanon has the highest in-
crease rate, followed by South Lebanon and the Biga; Mount Leba-
non places fourth, followed by Beirut. This trend is particularly
clear in the post-1952 period of universal suffrage, as Table 15 indi-
cates. One might have expected a positive correlation between vot-
ing participation figures and the level of socioeconomic development,

=== PDF_PAGE 244 ===
224 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
TABLE 15
OveER-ALL PERCENTAGE INCREASES IN VOTING
BY REGION, 1953-1964
Beirut Mountain North South Biga National
— 17.4* 42.6 64.4 56.3 86.6 52.6
* Beirut shows a net decrease in the number of voters for the 1953-1964 period.
For the 1953-1960 period, however, it shows an increase of 38.3 per cent. See
Note 3, p. 258.
but this is obviously not the case in Lebanon. Quite the contrary;
the “backward” districts exceed the economically developed areas
in the absolute rate of increase, even though they are losing popu-
lation to the Greater Beirut area. It will be shown shortly that the
backward areas also exhibit the greatest relative shifts in elite com-
position as well. The statistics suggest that the “other” Lebanon is
undergoing a popular political awakening. Some of this new ac-
tivity is channeled into the election process, but it is questionable
that all of it is absorbed by this mechanism.
Mount Lebanon and especially Beirut—the areas with high social
mobilization levels—do not participate to the same extent. The low
level of electoral participation in Beirut is a cause for concern, for
it is there that newly politicized lower and middle classes are con-
centrated. These groups have not made a very great impression on
the electoral process. This ominous situation is partially explained
by the fact that many Beirutis are registered in their home towns
and villages and thus vote outside the city. Some of the electoral
apathy also results from the cosmopolitan and cynical character of
this modern urban area. Traditional social organizations are relatively
weaker than in the rural areas, and modern urban machines are just
beginning to appear. Neither of these explanations eliminates the
problem that an enormous number of urban Lebanese do not par-
ticipate in the institutionalized politics that the electoral system,
above all, is supposed to provide. Many of the inhabitants of Greater
Beirut, of course, cannot vote; they are Syrian laborers, Palestinian
refugees, or Europeans. But this fact is no reason to believe that the
limited base of participation in the region has no serious consequences.
Impressions and interviews suggest that in many parts of the urban
core area there is disdain and even contempt for the electoral process.
In Beirut, the “new men” (as William Polk calls them) cannot come

=== PDF_PAGE 245 ===
Trends in Representation + 225
to power via traditional family means because urban political suc-
cess depends on money and traditional organization outside the
family.” At the same time communal particularism still hampers the
development of nontraditional machines.
The voting figures show that the increasingly politicized Lebanese
participate more and more in the formal political system. The figures
do not show, however, whether or not these people are also in-
creasingly committed to that system. The trend is thus not necessar-
ily a predictor of short-run stability: The increasing voting par-
ticipation of 1953 and 1957 did little to prevent the crisis of 1958.
The most the voting figures can show is that the present order is
not entirely stagnant in the face of demographic and social change.
Furthermore, regional voting figures reveal differential rates of in-
crease. Beirut, the urbanized and developed area, scores poorly.
Institutionalized mass participation there is relatively weak. Yet the
highly socially mobilized people in this area ought to be highly
participant. On the other hand, in the outlying areas, where political
life is dependent on the actions of a landed oligarchy, mass partici-
pation is increasing. This participation may be indicative of more
than blind obedience to local chieftains. If so, it suggests that the
increase is most pronounced where, in terms of systemic stability,
it is least desirable.
COMPETITIVENESS
A competitive electoral process is one sign of a healthy pluralistic
system because it indicates flexibility and responsiveness. A trend
toward increasing competitiveness suggests that a process of insti-
tutionalized change is developing. It also poses the question whether
or not “too much” competition imposes strains on stability.
For reasons already explored it is exceptionally important in
Lebanon that there be some degree of free play among the various
interests: For the traditional groups it is the only satisfactory as-
surance of security. Electoral contests in Lebanon have become
steadily more competitive during the two decades since independ-
ence. Although this fact does not say anything about the kind of
choice offered to the voters (it is still rather limited) it does show
that Lebanon’s political structure is flexible enough to support a
significant, though rarely unified, opposition. Lebanon’s moderately
competitive electoral process connects the country’s political culture

=== PDF_PAGE 246 ===
226 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
of traditional pluralism with its formal political system. In light of
the shift toward increasing voter participation and broadened re-
cruitment of candidates, the trend toward greater competition is
particularly significant.
Methodology
Calculations were made for 276 contests in the six parliamentary
elections between 1947 and 1964. “Contest” was defined on a sec-
tarian basis: A contest constituted the campaign for the seat or
seats allotted to a particular sect in a particular district. If in a
particular district there were four seats at stake, of which one was
allotted to a Greek Orthodox, one to a Maronite, and two to Sun-
nite Muslims, then by this definition there were three contests. Com-
petitiveness was determined by calculating the percentage of the
total vote that the winner or winners in each sectarian contest re-
ceived. A score of 100 per cent indicates that there was no opposi-
tion or no election—or that the opposition received no votes what-
ever. Such a race is noncompetitive. A score of less than 50 per
cent—reflecting a plurality but not a majority—is evidence not only
of competition but also of the fact that there were more than two
aspirants for each seat in the contest. It cannot be assumed that, if
the winner’s percentage of the vote was low, then his political posi-
tion was correspondingly weak because the opposition might be
fragmented among many candidates; the winners of a contest who
received only 40 per cent of the vote, with the rest being divided
among six isolated candidates, might in fact be stronger than the
winners in another district who received 60 per cent against a
unified opposition. But in all cases a score of 60 per cent or less
indicates a “definitely competitive” situation.
The System as a Whole
Table 16 indicates that the Lebanese system as a whole is moder-
ately competitive by the criterion established: The mean percentage
of winners for all 276 contests was 62.6 per cent. Of course, judged
by the standards of an American presidential election, a winner
with 62.6 per cent of the vote has won by a landslide, but, in
Lebanon’s comparatively minuscule constituencies, a winner by this
proportion may have enjoyed a margin of fewer than 2,000 votes.
With margins this small a winner can hardly afford to remain in-
different to his constituency if he wants to be re-elected.
The national mean for each of the six elections is compared in

=== PDF_PAGE 247 ===
Trends in Representation + 227
TABLE 16
MEAN PERCENTAGES OF TOTAL VOTES RECEIVED BY WINNERS
IN SIX PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
Mean for 6
1947 1951 1953 L957 1960_ 1964 Elections
80.0 60.1 62.2 60.5 595 61.1 62.6
Table 16. Two interesting points emerge. First, there is a significant
increase in competitiveness after 1947. The elections of that year—
the first conducted without the presence of foreign troops—were
notoriously corrupt, and they aroused serious opposition to Bechara
al-Khoury and Riad Sulh, two of the “founding fathers.” The 80
per cent that the regime’s candidates averaged in winning that elec-
tion suggests a distinctly noncompetitive situation. The high degree
of competitiveness four years later (60.1 per cent) indicates that
the Khoury regime, even though its supporters took a decisive ma-
jority of the parliamentary seats, was losing its authoritarian grip
and that the electoral process was capable of at least registering op-
position tendencies. The mean stabilizes after 1951, but the increase
in competitiveness does not cease. In fact, as Table 17 indicates,
TABLE 17
PERCENTAGE OF PARLIAMENTARY ELECTORAL CONTESTS IN
WHICH THE WINNERS RECEIVED LESS THAN 60 PER CENT
OF TOTAL VOTE
1947 195f L953 1957 1960 1964
43.3 56.4 54.5 39:6 65.0 Tg
the percentage of competitive contests has steadily risen. Table 17
records the percentage of contests in each election that fell into what
we have defined as a “definitely competitive” category. With the
slight exception of the 1953 election, there is a steady increase in
the percentage of competitive contests. The spread of competition
is particularly impressive because there has been a growing number
of contests to fill newly created seats.
The second interesting fact is that the mean percentage has hov-
ered so consistently at approximately 60 per cent since 1951. Even
though these elections span three presidential regimes, two near

=== PDF_PAGE 248 ===
228 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
revolutions, one acute crisis, and two attempted Putsches, there is
remarkable stability in voting behavior. This stability indicates a cer-
tain separation between the electoral process and national politics,
a separation that, though casting doubt on the relevance of elections
to important issues, is functional in that the constant figure is about
60 per cent and not, let us say, 35 or 85 per cent. The lower figure
would indicate that most candidates had won by only simple plurali-
ties. Such an outcome would suggest that most winners do not have
a very substantial popular backing and that the political culture is
more highly fragmented than it actually is. A high figure, as already
suggested, would indicate a weak opposition of any kind. An in-
creasing proportion of winners, tren, consistently wins by a clear
but not overwhelming majority; and the fact that it happens in the
absence of an organized party system renders it an even more im-
pressive indicator of basic stability.
Competitiveness by Region
All the regions show a reasonably high degree of competition in
their electoral contests. Mount Lebanon, long the most advanced
area, not surprisingly shows the most consistently high competition.
But South Lebanon, whose general level of development is very
low, is a close second. Then come the Biga, North Lebanon, and
Beirut, the least competitive of all. The rank order of these five
regions is curious. One might have expected to find a correlation
between the degree of competitiveness and the standard of living,
on the assumption that the higher the living standard (particularly
the level of education), the more independent the voter and the more
active his political life. In the advanced areas there would thus be
fewer safe seats. When one compares the regional rankings on
socioeconomic development with the rankings on competitiveness,
however, one does not find such a simple correlation.
Mount Lebanon seems to support the correlation hypothesis; it
scores in first place on both scales. This region in particular was
superior in educational facilities during and immediately after the
Mandate, when most current voters were of school age. At the
other end of the development scale, North Lebanon seems also to
support the idea; and the Biga has the middle rank on both scales.
Beirut and South Lebanon, however, present glaring discrepancies.
In the late 1950s Beirut and Mount Lebanon shared first place in
development, far exceeding the other regions, but on the competition
scale the two could not be farther apart. Beirut’s competitiveness

=== PDF_PAGE 249 ===
Trends in Representation + 229
score is very poor—just as its voting-participation score is very poor.
It is difficult to explain this performance merely by the fact that
Beirut is urban, whereas Mount Lebanon is suburban and rural; the
city of Tripoli is urban too, yet it exhibits a competitive mean that
is only a shade above the national mean and 3.8 per cent below the
mean for all of the North. Perhaps the answer lies in the fact that
Beirut is cosmopolitan and highly diverse in the sectarian, economic,
and cultural dimensions, whereas Tripoli is provincial, largely Sun-
nite, and less diversified. In Beirut politics is just another activity,
but in Tripoli it galvanizes the whole town. For Lebanon, neither
urbanization nor development is a good predictor of competitive-
ness.°
With time, all the regions have experienced increasingly competitive
contests. Most dramatic is the trend in the Biga, where pluralism has
blossomed and traditional seigneurs find it increasingly difficult to
maintain their dominance. South Lebanon is also the scene of con-
sistently close struggles. There, competitiveness has arisen out of the
stable bifactionalism of the Assaad family organization and its unified
opponents, but increased competitiveness also reflects the dispersion
of power and rivalry among a younger generation of highly educated
Shiites. North Lebanon remains the stronghold of landed proprie-
tors and clan bosses—both Sunnite and Maronite—against whom
effective opposition has yet to arise. As for Beirut, its competitive
performance was best in the topsy-turvy elections of 1953, when the
redistricting destroyed old spheres of influence. Beirut’s poor show-
ing in 1964 is the result of the successful efforts of the Kataeb to
build a modern political machine in the Christian district: It had
frightened away or absorbed the token opposition before election
day.
Competitiveness and Sectarianism
Because sectarianism is an abiding aspect of Lebanese politics, it
is worth inquiring if there is any relationship between it and com-
petitiveness. Is politics more competitive and thus more democratic
in the absence of sectarianism? Because sectarianism is the rule
throughout the country this is not an easy question to answer, but
crude guidance can be obtained by comparing the competitiveness
of single-sect and multisect districts. There were no single-sect dis-
tricts in 1947 and 1951, but the election law of 1952 did away
almost entirely with the multisectarian list system and created instead
thirty-three electoral districts, of which twenty-two were single-member

=== PDF_PAGE 250 ===
230 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
(and therefore single-sect). Calculations (on the same basis as the
previous discussion) show no significant difference between the
single-sect and the double-sect districts in terms of competitiveness,
the former averaged 62.8 per cent, only a shade above the national
average of 62.2 per cent. The 1957 electoral law reduced the
number of electoral districts to twenty-five, of which eight were
single-member (and single-sect) and five were multimember single-
sect. The thirteen single-sect districts averaged 67.7 per cent, some-
what less competitive than the national average of 60.5. In the 1960
elections a new high in over-all competitiveness was achieved, with
an average of 59.5 per cent for the sixty constituency contests; the
average for the ten single-sec’ districts was 59.1. In the 1964
elections, in which the 1960 district boundaries were retained, the
single-sect districts averaged 57.9 per cent, compared with the
general average of 61.1. It can be concluded, therefore, that there
was no important difference in competitiveness in single-sect and
multisect districts in the four elections in which there was a basis
for comparison. The absence of sectarianism does not seem to pro-
mote competitiveness, and multisect districts are not necessarily more
competitive than others.
Although the degree of competition is not affected by the number
of sects in the district, it is still possible that some sects are more
competitive than others. Our general knowledge about the socio-
economic differences between Muslims and Christians suggests that
Christian electoral contests might be more competitive than non-Chris-
tian contests because the Christians have had greater general exposure
to Western influences. There are two ways to test the accuracy of this
notion. First, one may compare Christian single-sect (single-member
and multimember): districts with non-Christian districts, assuming
that the minority sect populations in those districts are insignificant.
One can also make a more general investigation and compare the
closeness of all sectarian contests, including those in multisect dis-
tricts. The second comparison is less discriminating than is the first
because members of all sects vote for each sectarian seat in multisect
districts. The data show, however, that individuals in multisect dis-
tricts do not consistently vote straight tickets (in some contests candi-
dates run independently of any list) and that the votes cast for the
winning Maronite do not always equal the votes cast for the winning
Sunnite, even when both are on the same list. Variations in competi-
tiveness between different sectarian contests within a single district
may reflect differences in the political behavior of the sects. If the

=== PDF_PAGE 251 ===
Trends in Representation + 231
Christian contests are consistently and strikingly more competitive
in those situations for which we can make a comparison, then there
is something to the original hypothesis.
The notion of superior Christian competitiveness, however, is
clearly disproved by the first test, a comparison of fifty-four single-sect
district contests in the elections of 1953, 1957, 1960, and 1964. The
_ all-Muslim contests are more competitive than are the all-Christian
contests, with average percentages of 57.7 and 66.3, respectively.
(The percentage, as before, is the share of the total vote in a given
contest going to the winner or winners.) The percentage for Sun-
nites in twelve contests is 55.0 and for Shiites in eighteen contests
61.2, whereas the percentage for Maronites in sixteen contests is
63.3, for Greek Orthodox in four contests 74.7, for Protestants in
one contest 35.9, and for Armenian Orthodox in three contests 80.6.
The second test groups all 276 contests in the six parliamentary
elections by sect, and in this case there appears to be no significant
difference in competitiveness among them. The average share of the
total vote going to the winner in 147 contests for Christian seats is
62.6 per cent, whereas the average percentage for non-Christians is
60.2. Of the Christian sects the Maronites average 62.2 per cent, the
Greek Catholics 62.1 per cent, the Greek Orthodox 60.8 per cent,
and the Armenian Orthodox 71.7 per cent. Of the non-Christian
sects the Sunnites average 61.3 per cent, the Shiites 59.9 per cent,
and the Druzes 68.2 per cent. As far as the two tests are valid, sec-
tarian peculiarities have no predictable influence on competitiveness.
ORGANIZATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Lebanese political life, complex to begin with, is becoming increas-
ingly complex over time in terms of organization. This trend is a
highly important one for the student of political change. Increasing
organizational differentiation is at least a preliminary step in political
modernization. If such differentiation leads in turn to institution-
alization, the system’s capabilities, in terms of flexibility, stability,
broadened political recruitment, and administrative efficiency, are
enhanced. Without institutionalization, on the other hand, differenti-
ation can lead to disintegration. The electoral process offers an
excellent example of the increasing group differentiation in Lebanese
politics. To describe this process most effectively, an overview of

=== PDF_PAGE 252 ===
232 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
the trends during six parliamentary elections of the first two decades
may be helpful. ; <
Lebanon owes some of its moderate political success to its ability
to institutionalize the rivalry of factions. In Lebanese politics the
faction—a nonideological coalition of notables, their families, and
their clienteles—is the unit upon which other more complex forms
like caucuses (which are collections of factions bound together by
some external political goal) and organized parties are built. One
of the most successful institutions for combining traditional fac-
tions of Lebanon into a reasonably coherent political unit was
the amirate, or principality, ruled by an amir, a local hereditary
prince. But in the twentieth century an amirate is generally—
though not universally—regarded as an archaic form. Since the
Mandate, republican institutions have served as a framework for
regulating factional rivalry. These institutions have been strength-
ened by the National Pact of 1943. The subsequent decades have
seen the routinization of factional politics within this framework.
Factional Proliferation
To describe factional proliferation in the electoral process ade-
quately, it is necessary to impose categories and generalizations
on a field that does not lend itself easily to such academic niceties.
Lebanese factions have been classified in one of four categories
of increasing complexity: individuals, cliques (or lists, which is
the form in which they appear on the electoral scene), caucuses,
and parties.’ “Individuals” run independently of a list, caucus, or
party; they campaign on their own merits or espouse their own
programs. The individual may be extremely enlightened or re-
spected, but organizationally he is primitive because he relies only
upon an informal support group among his family and friends.
Scarcely less primitive in the organizational sense is the “clique”
or list, which is a coalition of notables gathered together to win
an election. Because of the nature of Lebanon’s electoral system,
each notable must rely on the others to pull the whole list to
victory. Although members of lists invariably speak of policies and
platforms, their basic appeal is entirely parochial, and lists win
mainly because the voters think that they will do most for the
area. As late as 1964, some two-thirds of the parliamentary mem-
bership was composed of deputies who ran either as individuals
or as members of lists. “Caucus groups” are primitive parties:
They command a slightly higher ranking in complexity because

=== PDF_PAGE 253 ===
Trends in Representation + 233
they are organized to institute national programs and they have
slightly broader geographical membership than lists have. In inde-
pendent Lebanon there have been only two major caucus groups,
the Constitutionalists (Destour) and the National Bloc, as well as
a smattering of minor ones like the Nida al-Qawmi, and the
Hay’at al-Watania. Because they are somewhat more nationally
- (rather than privately) oriented and rationalized organizationally
than are the cliques, the caucuses require a special place, though
their real organizational strength has proved less durable than
has that of certain such stable cliques as the Assaad list of
South Lebanon. Finally, there is the most elaborate form of
organization, the norm in most developed political systems of
the world but in Lebanon a rarity: the organized political party.
Counted as organized parties—even though they may lack the
degree of organization as well as some other important character-
istics of Western parties, like a national base and a secular out-
look—are the Kataeb, the Tashnaq, the P.P.S., the P.S.P., the
Communist Party, the Arab nationalists, the Baath, the Najjadeh,
and the Islamic Liberation Party. In speaking of the nonestablish-
ment organizations it was noted that only a handful of the out-
siders or counterelite have been elected to Parliament or named
to the Cabinet. The fact that party men are rarely included in
the institutions of government does not mean that the parties
are unimportant. Nor does it mean that there is not a more
visible party activity outside the Chamber: There is. For reasons
that should now be apparent, it has been very hard for parties to
break into Parliament. It is thus all the more important for the
observer to note carefully the attempts—both successes and failures
—of parties to gain access to Lebanese institutions. The criteria
used for classifying individuals as party members and for noting
the representation of parties in parliamentary contests (even where
it is nearly hidden in traditional forms), are therefore generous.
An attempt has been made to compare the contestants in seven
parliamentary contests, in 1943-1964, by employing the four-
category classification already described.
The actual classification process is cumulative rather than mutu-
ally exclusive; that is, certain lists in certain elections are also
caucus groups, and the same organizations have been classified
with each label. Certain lists may contain members of one or more
political parties; these lists are also classified separately. An in-
dividual may be classified both as an individual and as the repre-

=== PDF_PAGE 254 ===
234 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
sentative of a party. Furthermore, a caucus group is listed for
every list of candidates it fields: The Destour was thus counted
three times in the 1951 election because it ran lists in Metn,
Chouf, and Kisrwan. In order to introduce a bit more sophistica-
tion, all contestants in all categories have been cross-classified as
organizationally “strong” or “weak.” *
The General Trend
There is a distinct trend toward group differentiation. The in-
crease in the number of seats that are contested in each election
is, of course, some indication that the electoral process has be-
come more complex. There is more to it, howeyer, and to repre-
sent the complexity more adequately a simple weighting system
has been devised, which allots points to each organization accord-
ing to the following system:
Individuals Weak: Caucuses Weak:
Individuals Strong: Caucuses Strong:
Lists Weak: Parties Weak:
Lists Strong: RWe NN Parties Strong: BnWp
Every electoral grouping in every district in seven elections from
1943 through 1964 has been scored. The number of groups of
all types observed and the gross scores for each election are re-
ported in Table 18, which may be taken as a general summary
TABLE 18
SUMMARY OF THE TREND IN GROUP DIFFERENTIATION
IN SEVEN ELECTIONS
1943 1947 1951 1953 US Y/ 1960 1964
Number of groups 15 32, 52 104 104 148 132
Total score 47 83 127 243 254 ois 4 345
Ratio score: group 3.13:1 2.59:1 2.4471 2.34:15°2.28:1 2:41:71 92.6494
Number of seats By 35 ae. 44 66 99 99
of the trend in group differentiation. Whereas the number of
parliamentary seats increases by 80 per cent, the number of groups
that play in the electoral game increases by 880 per cent from
1943 to 1964. If 1960 is taken as the latest point of comparison,
the rate of increase in the number of groups is, of course, even

=== PDF_PAGE 255 ===
Trends in Representation + 235
higher. When the groups are weighted in terms of the classifica-
tion described previously, the rate of increase is also impressive:
T32 per ‘cent. It” 1s significant, however, that this increase in
“weight” does not exceed the rate of increase in the number of
groups, even though the more complex groupings are highly
weighted and generously classified. It seems clear that fragmenta-
tion has occurred somewhat more rapidly than has institution-
alization—the development of cohesive groupings—in the electoral
system. For example, although there were only fifteen distinct
groupings present in the 1943 elections, nearly all were strong
lists; the ratio of weighted score to number of groups was 3:1.
But twenty-one years later the group structure as a whole was
somewhat less complex, the ratio being 2.6:1, even though the
raw number of groups had vastly increased. When the total group
composition is examined, the reason for the decreasing ratio be-
comes apparent: The increased number of more primitive, lower-
scoring groups has almost exactly offset the scoring gains created
by the greater weight given to each new, more complex group.
Indeed, if the total weighted score is compared with the number
of groups, as in Table 18, the ratio hovers consistently around
2.5:1. The conclusion is clear: Simple differentiation of groups
has occurred over time as the Parliament has been enlarged and
the number of districts increased, but the share of the more com-
plex groups in this expanding arena, although it has expanded
absolutely, has remained constant relative to the shares of other
types of groups.
Caucuses and Organized Parties
Let us look specifically at the appearances of caucus and organ-
ized party representation in the electoral arena. The number of
such groups (both strong and weak) in each of the seven elections
is shown in Table 19.
Two conclusions may be drawn from the data in Table 19. The
locus of organized electoral politics is overwhelmingly the Beirut—
Mount Lebanon area, which has the highest social mobilization
and yet relatively poor voting participation. The appearance of
more complex forms has also shown an upward trend. The rate
of appearance of such forms accelerated after the fall of Bechara
al-Khoury in 1952 and increased sharply again after the accession
of General Chehab in 1958. Still, as we have seen, the rate of
increase of the more complex group forms is absolute, not rela-

=== PDF_PAGE 256 ===
236 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
TABLE 19
CAUCUS AND ORGANIZED PARTY REPRESENTATION
IN PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS
NUMBER OF GROUPS
Caucus 1943 1947 1951 1953 1957 1960 1964
Beirut-Mount Lebanon 2 3 5) 6 6 13 1Z
North-South-Biga 0 0 0 0 0 1 3
Party
Beirut-Mount Lebanon 3 6 6 12 12 je 12
North-South-Biqa 0 1 0 ps 3 =| 8
Total S 10 11 20 21 31 35
tive, and it only mirrors the increased differentiation of all com-
petitive groups, including individuals and lists. Furthermore, few
of the party groups have ever won seats, and, though Table 19
suggests that there is a degree of openness in the process, it also
shows that the process screens out new elements. The Communists
have run a few candidates in every election since 1943 and never
won a seat; the P.P.S. entered the Chamber officially as late as
1957 (though they seem to have supported their ex-member
Ghassan Tueni, who was elected in 1951 and 1953); and the
Kataeb did not succeed in electing a deputy until 1953. Only the
Armenian Tashnaq has consistently returned candidates to the
Chamber. The major caucus groups have fared no better. The
Destour virtually disappears as a discrete organization after 1952,
though a number of important leaders continue to claim affiliation
with the old Khoury machine; and the National Bloc, excluded
from power under Khoury, re-emerges in 1953, though virtually
indistinguishable—except in the sophistication of its leaders—from
the traditional lists.
Strong and Weak Organizations
The hypothesis that political development means stronger institu-
tions does not necessarily mean that these institutions must be
closer to modern Western rationalistic types. One could argue
convincingly that a trend toward stronger traditional organizations

=== PDF_PAGE 257 ===
Trends in Representation + 237
serves the same ends of political stability and even national de-
velopment. With this qualification in mind, the group structure in
the electoral process has been broken down in terms of strong and
weak institutions (Table 20).
TABLE 20
INCIDENCE OF STRONG ORGANIZATIONS IN LEBANESE
ELECTION CAMPAIGNS*
WEIGHTED PERCENTAGE OF STRONG
INDIVIDUALS, LISTS, CAUCUSES, AND
PARTIES OUT OF TOTAL SCORES
Region 1943 1947 1951 1953 1957 1960 1964
Beirut-Mount Lebanon 43-7225 /8 ey:y e oF) 38.3 62.7 56.9
North-South-Biqa LOO? 280:0 91.62 76.1 HERO 9fUns) y Spike)
National Ole ieee een Oc unmO4e2 a 4 0b nO Oa 64.1
* Calculations are percentage of total group scores accounted for by strong groups
of all types. By weighting the scores as described in the text, an attempt has been
made to count more heavily the appearance of, for example, a strong party as
opposed to a strong list.
Table 20 indicates that the national level of group strength in
the electoral process has generally remained constant, suggesting
that there has been no relative decline of strong (cohesive and
successful) organizations. The rural areas appear consistently more
highly organized than the Beirut-Mount Lebanon area (especially
Beirut): There are fewer loose coalitions in the rural picture. The
developed areas are showing a slight tendency toward higher or-
ganization over time, whereas organizational strength in the rural
areas is declining somewhat; there was, in short, a distinct tendency
toward convergence by 1964. In organizational complexity the two
Lebanons are becoming more alike: Organizations in Beirut and
Mount Lebanon are tightening up; in North Lebanon, South
Lebanon, and the Biga they are loosening. Nevertheless, in 1964,
as in 1943, the strong list—composed of notables generally with-
out modern political party affiliations—remained the dominant form
of organization, especially in the rural areas; and with a handful
of rare exceptions its dominance has not been challenged by non-
traditional organizations.

=== PDF_PAGE 258 ===
238 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
PARLIAMENTARY MEMBERSHIP
As the politically relevant stratum has increased in size, new sources
of power have been created, new philosophies have been articulated,
and new expectations have been created concerning public institu-
tions. Are the formal representative institutions opening up to a
new political generation? If in fact they are, one might expect to
observe increasing numbers of new men in Parliament; shifts in
the membership away from the old men toward the post-Ottoman,
and indeed post-Mandate, generations; shifts away from the tradi-
tional elite occupational bases of land and law; and shifts toward
more deputies and ministers with modern political orientation—
affiliation with caucuses and organized parties and not just with
traditional cliques. An examination of the parliamentary and Cab-
inet membership in the independence period will indicate whether
or not such trends are actually occurring.
The Chamber of Deputies warrants first consideration. Although
this institution may not actually govern Lebanon, its members still
play an important part in keeping the delicate political situation
in order. As the principal mediator between the rulers and the
ruled, the Lebanese Parliament—like all legislatures—must repre-
sent the real political forces in the country to some extent if the
system is to remain coherent. A brief description of precisely who
the Lebanese Chamber of Deputies represents and of the extent
to which its representational base is changing with Lebanon’s
changing society will indicate how well the Chamber fulfills its
prime function.
The cohesion of Lebanon’s parliamentary elite is apparent at a
glance. Interlocking relationships based on marriage, education,
region, sect, and occupational interests make it very difficult
to single out distinct types within the elite. The typical Lebanese
deputy is about fifty years old, bilingual, and university educated,
usually in the French tradition. He probably holds a law degree,
but, even if he actually practices law as a profession, he is not
prevented from engaging in banking, business, and above all poli-
tics. The typical deputy calls himself an “independent,” thus making
political distinctions hard to draw. At least 85 per cent of the
elite are affiliated with a traditional political bloc or faction, and
at least 95 per cent do not belong to a modern political party.

=== PDF_PAGE 259 ===
Trends in Representation + 239
With certain exceptions, the prevailing political attitudes cluster
well to the right of center in American terms.
The New-Entry Rate
The number and percentage of newcomers in each of the seven
Parliaments are presented in Table 21. The significance of the
TABLE 21
NEW ENTRANTS IN SEVEN LEBANESE PARLIAMENTS*
1943 1947 1951 1953; 1957 1960 1964
Number 31 on 45 12 26 52 29
Percentage 52.6 40.0 56.3 aD 39.4 52.0 29.3
* A new entrant is a man appearing for the first time in any Lebanese Parliament,
including those during the French Mandate. The percentages are calculated against
total membership figures that do not quite coincide with the number of seats,
owing to occasional mid-term replacements.
turnover rates may be briefly stated. They are very high com-
pared to older and more mature parliamentary systems. The per-
centage of new entrants in the British House of Commons, for
example, ranged between 2.1 per cent and 11.1 per cent in the
period 1950-1959.° The Lebanese rate has fluctuated between
27 and 56 per cent in the same period. Lebanon is thus more
similar to its neighbor Syria, whose new-entry rates in the same
period fluctuated between 42 and 79 per cent.'? The Lebanese
new-entry rate also fluctuates widely and unpredictably over time.
For all the homogeneity of its members, then, there is incessant
change in the Lebanese parliamentary elite, a symptom of the
system’s fluidity. This constant fluctuation in membership hinders
the effectiveness of Parliament by impairing consistency in legisla-
tion and breeds a tangible public cynicism. The more the Parlia-
ment changes the more it stagnates, people say; and they console
themselves with the thought that less change would be even worse.
Given this legislative merry-go-round it at first seems strange that
Lebanon’s radicals should complain that the turnover rates are
too low; what they are demanding, of course, is an infusion of
modernists and reformers, not just the sons of the old bosses.
These rates of turnover are not spread evenly throughout the
Chamber. Key positions like committee chairmanships are monopo-
lized by a band of parliamentary veterans who are perennially returned

=== PDF_PAGE 260 ===
240 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
from their safe districts. Thirty-five of these perennials have sat in
an average of 4.6 (out of 7) Parliaments; or, putting it another
way, nearly one-third of the seats available have been occupied by
14 per cent of all the deputies elected to those 7 Parliaments. Leg-
islative power is thus monopolized by a few, rendering the apparent
change even less meaningful than it might otherwise seem.
Age :
The Parliamentary elite of the 1960s is older than that of the
1940s. The mean age has risen from forty-six in the 1943 Parlia-
ment to fifty in the 1964 Parliament." Of course, this dimension
of change is not dramatic and in fact can be interpreted as a sign
that the electoral processes are producing a more mature elite. In
the United States 86th Congress, which might be considered mature,
the members averaged 51.9 years of age.’” Furthermore, it is an
obvious but important fact that a greater percentage of deputies have
been born in “modern” times. If one should arbitrarily choose a
birth date of 1910 as the dividing line between the men raised in
a traditional era and those raised in the post-Ottoman world, one
would find that the post-Ottoman deputies accounted for 10.3 per
cent of the 1943 Parliament and that the percentage has increased
steadily through 1964, when post-Ottoman deputies accounted for
64.3 per cent of the Chamber’s membership. Such qualifications,
although they may put the age change in better perspective, do
not impress the younger generation, whose formative years are not
only post-Ottoman but also postcolonial and who see access to
Lebanon’s establishment blocked by “old” men, old in both age and
outlook. Half the Lebanese population is under 20 years of age;
even the somewhat more youthful entrance age of parliamentary
newcomers (44.9 years) seems antique by comparison.
Educational Level
The high educational level of the deputies is impressive and
testifies to the exclusive nature of the parliamentary establishment.
About 63 per cent of all the new men elected between 1943 and
1964 held higher degrees, and most of the rest had secondary
schooling."” The Beirut-Mount Lebanon deputies were somewhat
more highly educated than were those from North Lebanon, South
Lebanon, and the Bigqa: Of the deputies elected from the two modern-
ized areas, 81.2 and 73.2 per cent had higher degrees, whereas the

=== PDF_PAGE 261 ===
Trends in Representation + 241
percentages of such deputies from the three outlying areas were
45.8, 62.8, and 46.4, respectively. The Christian deputies were
66.9 per cent university educated, compared with 55.9 per cent
for the non-Christian deputies. The Greek Catholics were the
most highly educated Christian sect, and the Sunnites were the
most highly educated non-Christian sect. The levels remained rela-
tively constant over time among all regions and sects.
Occupational Background
Stronger evidence for a shift in elite composition may be found
by studying the occupational backgrounds of Lebanese deputies.
At first glance the seven independence Parliaments all look alike in
occupational terms: They are aggregations of wealthy landowners,
lawyers, businessmen, and well-to-do professionals; and, indeed, this
picture is approximately correct for either the 1943 or the 1964
Parliament.’* Consistently absent are small businessmen, laborers,
small farmers, peasants, and women.’® In the entire roster of 251
deputies from 1943 through 1964, there were only 9 who come from
such groups.
Within the elite occupations represented by parliamentary deputies
there is a shift away from the traditional and parochial and toward
the achievement oriented and sophisticated, as Table 22 shows.
The landed proprietors have declined almost by half in relative
terms, although their numerical representation remains fairly con-
stant. At the other end of the elite occupational spectrum, profes-
sionals (doctors, teachers, engineers, civil servants, salaried employees,
and a few full-time politicians) have increased both numerically
and relatively. The shift is a muted echo of the more dramatic
diversification of power in Lebanese society. This trend is a hope-
ful indication that the establishment is slightly more receptive than
it used to be to politicians who rise outside the traditional prestige
occupations of land, law, and finance.
Because Lebanon has in effect a presidential system, there is
some point in comparing the parliamentary elite composition in
the three presidential regimes of the independence period. At the
same time, one may compare the parliamentary-elite composition
of areas of high and low social mobilization (Beirut-Mount Leb-
anon and North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and the Biqa, respectively).
This comparison is made in Table 23. The number of landlords
fell off most sharply between the Khoury and the Chamoun regimes,
both in absolute and relative terms. Under General Chehab, the

=== PDF_PAGE 262 ===
242 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
y 9 6 1 - v V I T a v d L I N d a W -ju a ao s d p p f 4 o 1a d0- 4 a d q i u y u s a y €° 8¢C OEe T e l e S ( i 44 C V 66 ‘ u o r y e d n s 3 0 a u o n e s i n g 4 u a i o .
T
p a r m e s a i d a a e y ( 9 9 6 1 J O W I M ) -ut p e z e o d d e s
o
T Z A T A V L , S H I L A d Y d A O S N O I L V d N D 9 D O
0 9 6 1
L S 6 l
c S 6 l I S 6 l L v 6 l C r e l
- V I T a V d
- V I T a d v V d
- v I T d v V d - v I T d v V d - v V I T a V d - v I T d v d
L N A a W N
I N F N
I N d W L N A a W I N d W L N A W
- J u a d 4 a d
- J u U a I 1 9 d
- J u a 1 a d - 1 u a o l a d - U u a I d a d - J u a o l a d
a s D
a s p
a D a s p a D a s p
joioy, { 0
[ v i o l f o
j v 1 0 L f o j v 1 0 L f o j v I 0 L f o jv10.[, f o
- 1 a q u a y
- d a q u i a y y
- l a q u i a y y a q u a - 1 a q u a y - l a q u i a y y
d i y s
d i y s ‘ O N
d i y s ‘ O N
‘ O N
d i y s ‘ O N d y s O N d y s
9 ¢ O ' L C
A S C C
6 O V
L C
8 I O S V 9 € L i v s 6 C S C S
O ' L T
V 6 e 9 ¢
V S
L
O
@
C ( G e l s 6 7 6 ' 0 € L i 0 ' 6 E
O ' L T
C O n C h
S i G
e
c
v
l O S E 8 7 @ V S e v l H E S
O ' e V
8 ° 8 7 ¢ 6 1
S ° 6 C c l L ' 8 7 @ € @ E L C S I V S T
O
9 9
W V 0 8
O
g s
T U e y } s 1 O U I o A B Y
a
S
n n d e p A u e w e s
n e s e q s a y n d e p J o J o q u i n u J e n j o e e y } P e e o x e s r o q u i n u p u e ‘ Q O T
‘ ( 7 S 6 l ‘ y o u n
: y n i I e g ) [ a i g
a s a u n g a T 2 . I ) y o k k i u p u q n y - j p y o j m o p - 1 7 ‘ I e p r e H p e w y y ‘
[
j u
“
o
(
w
P 9 6 T ‘ A M I G A
S U O N I P A : M M E g )
F 9 - E 9 6 T ‘ U o U n G a T MI C U M S C M P U Y ‘ s o q e r y 10 s a s i e u e q r ]
0 % ‘ [ O U s n o r I s v y
a
j p p i y W . u o u R q e T
U I j u o u r d o j a s e q , [ e o fod P u e s s e s o 1 g T e 1 o p e T y C Y L , U E W o y
n o e i d sty} ‘ p o y e t n
u
m o o e U o T e U N O y U t
j e o r y d e s s 0 1 q j e u o N I p p e s v ‘ u o n e d n o s 0 a u o A t u o A y n d e p & p e m
o
‘ A j d r e y s o 1 0 u l
y n q e 1 0 4 W o p l a s s p u e d o u T e s 9 U } p e o n p o i d 31 y s n o y } e d e
‘ O N u o u v d n d I Q T e p u e y G C M E T 6 1 s s o u l s n g S I [ e u o l s s o j o l g ‘ O N [ 8 1 0 L 6 S s o m n d e q j o p e e d x e s e d e } U I I I O d x e y i e d j o A r e 1 q r y s u o l e j u e U N s 0 q S e p J e p n z o e y e p o s o y } T [ e J 2 1 0 4 } < 9 8 - € L T ‘ K r e m i q i e A [ s U u I s e a I o

=== PDF_PAGE 263 ===
a q a y Trends in Representation + 243
ds
nl
yo
E P 6 I @ V H a H O P 9 6 p j u a o s a g s a
i
W o 1 f
u
S I T 9 ° 0 V L S e t 8 ° 6 1 O s 8 7 L y© L S E
- 6 os
V P
I 6
I
d v
n a “ O
9 fa
i s
o“gO N eV OF tc 87 Of
Q o l
0 0u
N
D
[ 0
1 s
901€ 6 901€ 6 901
d
V I£T6 v£6y
L 9I0v1
‘ N O I N O O W V H O L S 6 L a d f p o j u a a i a g y n d a q W o l f u o l g a y 6 C l c L A S 6 1 s L A G E 8 ° 8 C $ 6 7 C B E L O E
O a
V L s
N 6
a N V A T I I “ E S O g " O N O l O € E G 6 1 S T L I 0 c e l
A S
D I
%,
‘ N O I
[
P I O L S U O I
c S 8 S c S 8 S c S 8 S c S 8 S
€I V
A T A V
A U V
L I N AA WL VI
ITATAMA V
G
“ A W NYI YO F
V A V H
O
A E
A U N O H Y - 1
“ € v é l
“ L y
6 l
I S 6 l a s v j{ouOa o 1 a g
[ D I
O L
s a i n d a q
S
U u O N I S O g
w o
r l u o l s a y
‘ON
£ 6
L 0 ¢
8 7
O 9 9
8 9
O V3
8 E
O Ev
b e
6 1
6 €
c o l
1 c
C C
O V6
8 E
c O T
L Y l
S I
T 6 l 6 6
C O € c o £ £ T
e
g
D I UT « A N I : b @ - sx x T A N I b a - 1 S - I N T A u l e g b g - T S - I N T W - N l e g b a - 1 S - I N o u r g s y ] u e g s T u o u R
I S u o
A O T g ‘ ‘ u‘
T
N j o
r
u o y n d n d I
Q
p u e y
T
g M C T s s o u i s n g = [ e u o r s s
o
:.
T W = J U N o
W
Y O = N “ , I
4
N
§
J T S = Y I N o S
xx
b g = ‘ e b i g

=== PDF_PAGE 264 ===
244 > INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
relative decline in the number of landlords continued, though the
absolute number increased somewhat. It is notable that landlords
retained 40 per cent of the rural positions even under the Chehab
regime. The number of lawyers declined relatively during all regimes
but rose in absolute terms in the Chehab regime, whereas the num-
ber of businessmen diminished over time in the Beirut-Mount
Lebanon area and slightly increased in the outlying regions. The
number of professionals increased generally but relatively faster in
North Lebanon, South Lebanon, and the Biqa.
Table 23 indicates that the occupational shift is not uniform
by region. Beirut and Mount Lebanon have elected many fewer
landlords to the seven parliaments than have the outlying regions,
averaging 23.9 per cent and 19.1 per cent respectively, compared
with percentages of 52.8, 48.7, and 59.2 in North Lebanon, South
Lebanon, and the Biqa. The rate of decline in the number of land-
lords has been much higher in the outlying areas, however, and
the relative rise in the number of professionals has been much
greater there. Beirut and Mount Lebanon thus seem to exhibit
greater consistency in the occupational affiliations of the candidates
they elect than do the rural districts. This finding is perhaps an
ominous one, for one might expect the area of high social mobiliza-
tion to show more change than the relatively quiet hinterland. If
the hinterland is not really as quiet as it seems, then its relative
neglect ought to be ended. The lawyers and businessmen were
slightly more concentrated among the deputies in the Beirut-Mount
Lebanon area than in the other three provinces.
There are also notable occupational differences between the
Christian and the non-Christian deputies. Non-Christian landlord
representation declined much faster than did Christian landlord
representation between 1943 and 1967. The percentage of Christian
deputies who are lawyers has declined, whereas law as an occupa-
tional base among non-Christian deputies has somewhat increased,
reflecting no doubt the fact that the legal profession has become
more accessible to non-Christians in recent years. There is no sig-
nificant shift in the business and finance representation: For Chris-
tians this base remains consistently more important than for Sun-
nites, Shiites, and Druzes.1¢ Interestingly, the rate of increase of
deputies from the professions is roughly the same for Christians
and non-Christians. The nonlegal professions seem thus to have
about equal political relevance for the elite of both religions, in

=== PDF_PAGE 265 ===
Trends in Representation + 245
clear contrast to land (which is more important for Muslims than
for Christians) and law and business (which are better political
bases for Christians than for non-Christians). By looking at the
distribution over time it is possible to plot the changing recruit-
ment patterns within the two communities. Among the Christians
through 1957 law and business are the chief occupational bases
from which deputies are recruited, but in 1960 and 1964 the non-
legal professions take first place by a narrow margin. Through 1957
the greatest number of non-Christian deputies was in the land-
owner category (although in the small Parliament of 1953 there
was an equal number of lawyers), but in 1960 the steadily increas-
ing category of professionals became the largest occupational group.
The 1958 crisis has proved to be a kind of watershed in the recruit-
ment process for Christian and non-Christian deputies alike. These
trends can be more clearly shown by comparing the occupational
composition of new deputies over time by religion. As might be
expected, among the non-Christian newcomers the number of land-
lords is declining even faster than among all non-Christians in
particular parliaments. From the beginning of independence, the
professions have provided a better base for election to Parliament
for non-Christians than for Christians. The percentage of Christians
and non-Christians who are lawyers has become nearly equal, though
in 1943 law was primarily a means to power for Christians.
Finally, let us compare the occupational shifts in the two major
sects, Maronite Christians and Sunnite Muslims, the two most polit-
ically important religious communities. During the Khoury regime land
and the nonlegal professions were the dominant political back-
grounds among the Sunnite deputies, whereas by 1964 there was
a fairly even distribution among all four occupational groups, be-
cause land had declined as the other three advanced. Maronites
have retained throughout the period a consistent and substantial
landed representation in the Chamber, despite the near absence
of feudalism in Mount Lebanon. There are, of course, concentra-
tions of Maronites in all the outlying regions, particularly North
Lebanon. The Maronites, too, have exhibited an increasingly even
distribution of occupational origin, marked by the relative decline in
the number of lawyers and the rise in the number of nonlegal profes-
sionals. This gradual equalization of occupational categories in
the two major sects may be taken as an indication of the slight
broadening of access to Parliament during the independence period.

=== PDF_PAGE 266 ===
246 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Political Orientation
The great majority of Lebanon’s parliamentary deputies have no
political orientation beyond the list or clique that got them elected.
Nevertheless, there is some indication that the proportion of deputies
with more sophisticated political orientation has been increasing
since about 1949, when the Khoury machine began to deteriorate
rapidly. As noted earlier, it is difficult in Lebanon to specify when
a traditional clique has metamorphosed into a more modern political
organization. It is similarly difficult to decide whether a deputy’s
political orientation, regardless of his opinions, is archaic or modern.
To reveal this political orientation, the membership of the seven in-
dependence parliaments has been evaluated (in Table 24) against
TABLE 24
PERCENTAGE OF DEPUTIES WITH “MODERN” ORIENTATION,
1943-1964 *
PARLIAMENT
Standard of
Classification 1943 1947 1951 1953 1957 1960 1964
Generous
Number 15 6 2D 11 13 35 30
Percentage 23 10.9 28.8 25.0 1937 ee 30.3
Restrictive
Number 2 2, 9 6 Ti 23 20
Percentage 3.6 3.6 HEY 13.6 10.6 2352 20.2
Number of
deputies 55 55) 77 44 66 99 99
* The classification, particularly in the early Parliaments, is difficult because the
caucus memberships shifted a good deal. I have tried to include as Destourians
only those consistently associated with Bechara al-Khoury and his group and have
excluded some (in 1947, 1953, and 1957 especially) who had gone off in other
directions. The “restrictive” listing is less arbitrary and includes individuals who
were party members, were supported by parties, or were fairly clearly affiliated
with organized parties. For example, I counted Ghassan Tueni in 1951 and 1953
as a P.P.S. candidate, even though he was no longer an actual member of the
P.P.S., and I counted Naim Mughabghab in 1957 as an affiliate of the P.P.S., even
though he was not their candidate. I did count Kamal Jumblat with the National
Bloc in 1943, though he bolted during the crisis with France three months later.
I did not count him in 1947, but I have counted him as head of the P.S.P. from
1951 onwards. This classification is generally consistent with that of Michael W.
Suleiman, Political Parties in Lebanon (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967),
p. 265.

=== PDF_PAGE 267 ===
Trends in Representation + 247
two standards of political orientation, one generous and the other
restrictive in its definition of a nontraditional political affiliation.
The generous standard assumes that any deputy who is (or was,
even for a brief period) affiliated with a caucus group or organized
party should be counted as one of the “modern” group.!’ The re-
Strictive standard admits to the modern group only those deputies
_ affiliated with an organized party and excludes notables identified
with the old caucus groups. According to the generous classifica-
tion, roughly one-third of the deputies have held affiliations beyond
the strictly parochial at some time during the two decades, but there
is no discernible trend. The figures reflect the country’s basic political
structure: Beirut and Mount Lebanon have supported an active
caucus politics, which has been concerned mainly with the questions
of national independence and the interpretation of the National
Pact; in the traditional rural areas nonmodern regional cliques and
client groups remain the dominant forms. Beirut and Mount Leb-
anon supply nearly all the deputies that are included as modern
under either the generous or the restrictive classification. Further-
more, the overwhelming majority of the modern deputies are Chris-
tians. The restrictive classification reveals a trend toward increasing
representation of the modern deputies. According to this classifi-
cation, these affiliates of organized parties come from even more
diverse sectarian and geographical backgrounds than do the depu-
ties who are considered modern according to the generous clas-
sification: There are proportionally fewer deputies who are Chris-
tian and fewer who come from the Beirut-Mount Lebanon area,
even though these deputies still account for the buik of the “restric-
tively modern” type. This weak trend is indicative of a certain
broadening of the electoral process, but it should not be over-
stressed: The fact remains that in the middle 1960s fewer than
one fourth of the Lebanese deputies have party affiliations.
BARRIERS TO INNOVATION AND ADJUSTMENT
Lebanon’s electoral trends are cause for what W. S. Gilbert might
have called “modified rapture.” The sectarian list system keeps
primordial conflicts under control. Voting participation increases,
and elections occur regularly, suggesting a degree of successful
institutionalization. Electoral competition shows moderate improve-
ment over time without producing either chaos or stalemate. The

=== PDF_PAGE 268 ===
248 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
trend toward factional proliferation suggests the development of a
more complex and stable system. As for the parliamentary elite,
it shows both continuity and change. Furthermore, the contemporary
Lebanese electoral process is thoroughly rooted in Lebanon’s com-
munal structure. Every deputy has a vast network of poor cousins
who feel a special attachment to their successful namesake and
who in fact often do benefit from his position. One might not be-
lieve that these traditional points of access still exist unless he had
seen numerous deputies receiving rooms full of constituents. The
parliamentary elite is by no means as unresponsive to public wishes
as the exclusive composition of its membership might imply.
_ Nevertheless, this happy picture is flawed. The limited effective-
ness and the dysfunctional aspects of the electoral system have al-
ready been discussed. The electoral process, furthermore, actually
perpetuates rather than resolves Lebanon’s political dilemma. Two
facts should be amply clear from the preceding discussion. First,
the institutionalization of traditional pluralism is essential to the
stability that in turn is necessary for national development. Second,
whereas the electoral and parliamentary institutions carry out the
institutionalization functions associated with stability, they do not
do so very well. As mechanisms for conflict resolution among the
establishment notables they perform a difficult task with considerable
success, but as devices for recruiting and integrating a growing
nontraditional political stratum they leave much to be desired,
notwithstanding the limited trends toward adjustment and broaden-
ing in this area. There are three formidable barriers to greater
innovation and adjustment: the exclusion of organized, nontradi-
tional politicians, deeply ingrained corruption, and high election
costs.
Exclusion of Organized, Nontraditional Politicians
The only aspect of Lebanese society that is badly represented in
Parliament is the political element. Paradoxical as such a state-
ment may appear, it points up a very real weakness in the system.
Just as Lebanese society has become more complex, so has its
politically active stratum become stronger and more highly dif-
ferentiated. It is true that there is a trend toward the increasing
representation of “modern” political types, but the discussion of
Table 24 indicated that this trend is rather feeble. One might have
thought that the shift away from a large representation of land-
lords in favor of professionals would be accompanied by an increas-

=== PDF_PAGE 269 ===
Trends in Representation + 249
ing politicization of the Chamber and especially a strengthening of
“progressive” political ideas. Even if the occupational shift were
to succeed in transforming Parliament, however, it would be impos-
sible to predict its political orientation. The fact is that there is no
correlation between socioeconomic background and political opinion
in the Chamber or cabinet. A feudal landlord is the founder and
_ Mainstay of the Progressive Socialist Party, and he has been sup-
ported by lawyers and bankers. The most conservative deputies
are doctors. Lawyers are found supporting all causes. Whatever
increase there has been in the number of deputies with modern
political ideas and affiliations, it does not seem to be related to
the change in the occupational backgrounds of the new men.
Perhaps it is unfair to condemn an institution for excluding what
in fact does not exist. Lebanon may have “parties,” but it does not
have a party system. The structural and environmental conditions
of the parliamentary and electoral mechanisms are, to say the
least, not conducive to the development of rationalized party or-
ganizations. All parties that are represented owe their survival to
traditional appeals to some extent. Members of the middle-class
intelligentsia find association with such parties self-defeating, yet
without organized support they cannot break into politics. Their
lack of representation in Parliament only contributes to the weak-
ness of that institution in the total system and therefore the weak-
ness of the total system itself. Two examples may clarify the
problems that members of the modern stratum face in the electoral
process.
In one case, a young Druze university professor was a candidate
in the 1960 election. The professor, whose father was a business-
man, had taken a doctorate in the United States. He ran as an
independent in Aley, a town just above Beirut. In his own anal-
ysis, this man had to run on the basis of his ideas and skills as a pro-
fessor, for he did not have the influence of an amir or a bey and was
not extraordinarily rich, nor did he wish to compromise his prin-
ciples by joining the clique of an established notable. Unfortunately
for his chances, Aley is in the electoral territory of Amir Majid
Arslan, who represents the Yazbaki faction of the Druze sect. A
list supported by Kamal Jumblat, leader of the rival Druze fac-
tion and head of the Progressive Socialist Party, was also compet-
ing. Although the town of Aley itself is Christian, the surrounding
area is mostly Yazbaki Druze. Under such circumstances it was
unlikely that an independent, especially a Druze, could win; for

=== PDF_PAGE 270 ===
250 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
the majority of the Druzes would support Amir Majid on tradi-
tional grounds, and the remainder would be pulled into the camp of
Kamal Bey. Because both Majid Arslan and Kamal wouter are
powerful traditional leaders and exert strong “coattail effects and
because both were putting up Christian candidates as well (the
Arslan list had important support from former President Camille
Chamoun), it was unlikely that a Druze independent could pull
enough of the Christian vote to win. The results were more favor-
able than the professor expected, but he still lost badly. Whereas all
the candidates on the Arslan list won, polling between 8,000 and
16,400 votes each, and the Jumblat-P.S.P. candidates received be-
tween 6,900 and 8,400 each, the professor won 4,674 votes. Most of
these votes, he suspected, were from the younger and better-educated
groups, and not more than 1,000 of them were Druze. Why did
the professor run under such unfavorable circumstances? Part of
his motivation was simply ambition; he also wanted to further the
interests of the Druze community. Finally, as he put it, he wanted
to “give something to his country.” In particular, he wanted to
strengthen the civil service and reduce the patronage power of the
deputies. Reflecting on the campaign after his defeat, he decided
that one of his mistakes had been not to run on a list. The only
alternative was to run as an individual. Instead of adapting tradi-
tional means for a reformist end, the professor had tried to organize
an independent campaign and lost. If there had been a nontradi-
tional party or organization to put up a list of like-minded progres-
sive candidates, he might have won.
The second case is the campaign for a Sunnite seat in Beirut’s
second district in 1964, and the candidate was a highly articulate,
well-educated, Sunnite Muslim. He may be described as a “Lebanese
progressive” and was one of the bright young men who had been
recruited into public service to undertake President Chehab’s
modernization of the state. As an editor, he was a strong defender
of the army against charges from conservative Christian notables
that it was interfering in politics. His campaign was planned long in
advance of the election, and he worked assiduously to build up his
reputation as a modernist but one who did not want to upset the
political status quo. Some years before the 1964 elections he had
attempted unsuccessfully to organize a political party. In 1964, it
was the lack of a party organization that ensured his defeat.
Beirut’s second district, after the redistricting of 1960, was a
small “catch-all” district, which elected a Shiite, a minority Christian,

=== PDF_PAGE 271 ===
Trends in Representation + 251
and a Sunnite deputy. The first and third districts, on the other
hand, were in effect reserved for the Kataeb-dominated Christian
leaders and the more influential Sunnite notables respectively. There
were no lists in the second district, although there were very weak
associations among some of the candidates, and the district was
mostly Christian but not heavily Maronite. In the previous election,
_ Beirut’s second district had returned three progressives, including
a member of the Progressive Socialist Party and a member of the
Najjadeh. Because the traditional and sectarian factors were some-
what weaker there than elsewhere, it seemed a sensible district from
which a rising modern politician might seek election. Traditional
factors, however, still proved strong enough to defeat the modernist
Sunnite candidate. He had been opposed by “Papa” Sami Sulh, a
man who was once one of the top Sunnite leaders but who had lost
a great deal of influence among Sunnites through his association
with President Chamoun. Among the minority groups, especially
the Christians, however, he was still regarded with affection, espe-
cially in comparison to the other Sunnite candidates. The young
modernist was also opposed by Adnan Hakim, chief of the Naj-
jadeh, the pan-Islamic political party, a man not greatly beloved
by Christians. Compared with his rivals the newcomer was a moder-
ate, secular progressive. In this election, however, secular progres-
sivism was no match for traditional personalities and even frag-
mentary alliances. Sami Sulh won with 5,403 votes; Hakim was a
close second with 5,337; and the newcomer received 2,339. It is
probable that Sulh won most of the Christian votes and Hakim
most of the Sunnite votes, leaving the newcomer with no substan-
tial body of support. Actually, the outcome was slightly more com-
plex. Sami Sulh had allied informally with the old Shiite notable,
Rashid Beydoun. Beydoun, in turn, had associated with the candi-
date running for the seat allotted jointly to all the sects that were
too small for separate representation, Farid Jibran, who was allied
with the Druze leader, Kamal Jumblat. Sulh, through clever al-
liances, thus attracted to himself a share of the entire non-Sunnite
—Shiite and Druze—vote in the district, as well as the Christian
vote. Hakim and his former co-lister Mohsen Slim, a Shiite also
known for his radical views, found to their dismay that radicalism
was no longer popular in the second district and that people ap-
parently preferred the old, dependable, and harmless candidates.
This shift in opinion also doubtless hurt the moderate progressive
candidate. The backing of an organized party might have enabled

=== PDF_PAGE 272 ===
252 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
this “new man” to overcome his electoral obstacles; lacking such a
coherent organization, he did not have a chance.
Corruption and Ceercion
Corruption is a distinctive feature of the Lebanese political sys-
tem.’* It takes many forms, from vote buying to fairly severe intimi-
dation. Corrupt practices may be seen as a kind of degenerate
substitute for rationalized political organization; both the regime
and the opposition resort to them in an attempt to control opposi-
tion factions. Both also find corruption a useful tool in breaking
the grip of incumbents who are not likely to be turned out of
office by the “free” workings of the ballot box. Useful as it is to
short-run system maintenance, corruption is dysfunctional to Leba-
non’s political modernization in the long run. Prolonged experience
with governmental corruption contributes significantly to the popu-
lar cynicism and disillusionment that deprive the political institu-
tions of legitimacy. We shall give a few examples to demonstrate
the accuracy of this conclusion.
Vote buying is certainly a normal electoral practice in Lebanon,
particularly in the highly competitive districts where victory may
hinge on a few hundred votes. The low incomes of most voters
stimulate the practice, and a vicious circle of cynicism perpetuates
it. A poor man who sells his vote for L£100 (U.S. $33) can feed
himself for perhaps one month. Several well-known politicians
(interviewed in 1962 and 1965) admitted quite freely to allocating
certain amounts for vote buying. They regretted the necessity but
argued that it was standard practice in their districts. One com-
plained that the price of votes has been going up rapidly in recent
years, but then so has the income of politicians. In any case, the
practice is still widespread, particularly in Zahleh and parts of
Beirut, both developed, Westernized areas.
Negative pressures are also common: They range from hiring
away all the taxis to keep an opponent’s supporters from the polls
to murdering political opponents. In this kind of behavior, as in
bribery, the Lebanese were well tutored by the French. Mandate
elections were not noted for their purity.'° The last election held
under Mandate auspices (1943) was described by a participant,
one of the veterans of Lebanese politics, as among the worst he had
ever encountered in terms of official interference and pressures.”
The elections of May 25, 1947, however, stand above all the others
before or since as a model for ingenious corruption. The spirit of

=== PDF_PAGE 273 ===
Trends in Representation + 253
that campaign is best illustrated by the following excerpt from a
Beirut magazine article, entitled “How to Choose Your Deputies:
Necessary, Precise Instructions”:
—Every voter who is on the list can participate—dead or alive.
—Voters may cast more than one ballot, depending on the situation.
—You don’t have to carry your Lebanese identity card because all
Arabs are brothers.
—The ballot box can have more than one opening; it is best if it has two
—one for deposits and one for withdrawals.
—No voter may cast more than 10 ballots.
—Never say who won or lost—even if one man is 10 times ahead of
the other—until an official declaration is made.?!
After the balloting, which was dubbed, “the operation of May 25th,”
the opposition National Bloc charged: “By means of negotiations,
intimidation, and all sorts of intervention the Government has suc-
ceeded in destroying the opposition in many districts or in forcing
the candidates to withdraw.” ** Lists of registered voters had not
been sent to the village councils on time. In some cases the location
of the polling place was not revealed until election day, and then it
was inaccessible. The date of the election itself was not announced
far in advance. There was ballot box stuffing, minor violence in the
polling areas, and interference by election officials, gendarmerie,
police, and mukhtars. Three days before the election a National
Bloc meeting in Jbeil was broken up by police and its speaker,
Raymond Edde, was arrested. The opposition press claimed that
the government had forged 30,000 new identity cards and was also
using the identity cards of 3,700 Armenians repatriated to the
Soviet Union. In his memoirs, President Khoury concedes that some
irregularities occurred, especially in Mount Lebanon, but he claims
that they did not affect the results significantly.”
Although in no subsequent election have there been such brazen
violations as in the 1947 vote, neither have they all been free of
various sorts of coercion. Every election and its aftermath produces
conflict ranging from simple threats to violence and murder. In
1953, for example, a landed political boss from North Lebanon,
Muhammad Abboud, was gunned down in broad daylight in Beirut,
the victim of a political feud with his cousin. The 1957 elections
were carried out with unmistakable government interference as the
interior situation deteriorated.24 Opposition groups had to obtain
permission from the Ministry of Defense to hold public meetings;

=== PDF_PAGE 274 ===
254 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
candidates were forbidden to speak outside their own districts. The
opposition announced it would defy the government restrictions on
public meetings, and it staged a big rally on May 30. Violence broke
out, and the army moved in to restore order; two people were killed,
and a number were injured, including one of the major leaders,
Saeb Salam.
In another incident, an opposition P.S.P. candidate in Beirut re-
calls that he was labeled a communist and that the government
jailed his followers every time he held a public meeting because
the Communist Party was outlawed. On election day itself, he re-
calls, the government resorted to numerous devices to harry the
opposition. Every candidate was supposed to supply an observer
for each of Beirut’s 250 polling places; on the night before the
election 160 of this candidate’s observers were arrested. Intimida-
tion of voters reached new heights of ingenuity.” Following the
balloting in Mount Lebanon on June 16, 1957, the two “neutrals”
who had been added to the Cabinet to ensure fair elections re-
signed.?° Shortly after that election, the combination of family feuds
with national politics resulted in the massacre of seventeen Maronites
in a church near Zagharta; ten members of the (pro-Chamoun)
Duaihy family and seven from the rival (anti-Chamoun) clans of
Frangieh and Moawad were killed.
After the 1958 crisis and during the Chehab regime, violence
continued to be a hazard of parliamentary life. When a pro-Jumblat
mob assassinated a pro-Chamoun deputy, Naim Mughabghab, in
July 1959, he was replaced by a pro-Jumblat deputy. Chehab’s
regime was also marred by other assaults on certain opposition
deputies and journalists. The 1960 and 1964 elections were ac-
companied by the usual irregularities, but a new factor was present.
The military appeared to be taking more than professional interest
in the outcome of certain campaigns. The National Bloc leader,
Raymond Edde—a man long accustomed to governmental pres-
sures—accused the army of trying to arrange his defeat in Jbeil
in the 1960 and 1964 general elections and in the by-election of
1965.
All in all, bribery, coercion, and other forms of corruption are
quite common in the electoral process, and nobody is very sur-
prised when new instances are pointed out. There can be no doubt,
however, that they have tended to hinder the legitimization of
government in general—the civil service and the courts as well as

=== PDF_PAGE 275 ===
Trends in Representation + 255
Parliament and the military—and encouraged a cynicism that is
dysfunctional for political modernization.
High Campaign Costs
The cost of running for Parliament—exorbitant in relation to the
living standard—can best be illustrated by some figures. In the first
place, the annual per capita income was about $400 in the early
1960s, and only 3 per cent of the work force had an annual income
exceeding $3,300. A candidate in recent years has been obliged
to make a $1,000 deposit in order to run at all, and it is refundable
only if he receives at least 20 per cent of the total vote. This re-
quirement alone—in the absence of strong political parties that
might contribute a deposit for nonelite candidates—militates against
the candidacy of the newly politicized professionals, not to mention
the ordinary people. Lebanon’s folklore hero, a shrewd old moun-
tain peasant named Abu Khalil, could never be elected to Parlia-
ment unless the market for his apples greatly improved. The regis-
tration fee is only the first barrier to nonestablishment candidacies.
Campaign expenses alone make Lebanese elections among the most
expensive in the world, calculated on a per capita basis. Assuming
conservatively that each of the 267 candidates who took part in the
1960 elections spent about L£40,000, the whole election may have
cost candidates about L£10,680,000. This figure comes to a per
capita campaign cost of L£5.34, or about $1.78, for every Leba-
nese citizen in a population of 2 million, and it may be compared
with Alexander Heard’s estimate for the per capita expenditure in
election campaigns in the United States ($0.90), West Germany
($0.25), Italy ($0.50), and Israel (more than $5.00).** A more
sophisticated but still conservative calculation for the same election
gives a total of L£16,635,000, which comes to 128:327($2:77)
per capita.?* A deputy from Aley reported he spent L£100,000
both in 1957 and 1960; a major Beirut notable reported spending
L£70,000 to finance his election to Parliament. Independent esti-
mates suggest that these figures are on the low side. Other indi-
vidual deputies in 1960 were said to have spent sums varying from
L£12,000, to L£800,000.”° By 1964, election costs seemed to
have risen appreciably. One major Beirut list reportedly spent be-
tween L£1 million and L£1.5 million during the 1964 campaign
and two independent notables L£1 million between them. A vet-
eran election reporter estimated that individual candidates in Beirut

=== PDF_PAGE 276 ===
256 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
were spending about L£120,000 on the average.*° Whatever figures
one prefers, one can only conclude that people in the middle- and
lower-income groups cannot run for office in Lebanon without out-
side assistance, and outside assistance can only come from either
the patricians or from foreign sources as long as there are no organ-
ized, mass-based parties. Why are elections so expensive? Although
vote buying and other corrupt practices are common, legitimate
expenses alone are still heavy. In the rural areas a major outlay is
hiring caravans of cars to “whistle stop” in the numerous villages.
On election day itself, it is customary for the candidates to provide
taxi service for the voters to the polling place. Because a great
many provincial voters live in Beirut, these costs can be heavy.
Other expenses include posters, badges, rental fees for public halls,
and refreshments.*! High costs as well as the web of tradition thus
exclude from the parliamentary elite representatives of the newly
politicized elements in Lebanon.
CONCLUSION
A shortage of politicians is nothing to complain about in the opin-
ion of most Lebanese. The majority of the Lebanese citizens feel
that all politicians are bad. If Parliament and Cabinet are to per-
form the essential representative function in Lebanon’s political
system, however, the more politicians—good or bad—in the estab-
lishment, the better. President Chehab reportedly decided that Leb-
anese political life could be most quickly improved by putting as
many of the traditional leaders in the Cabinet as possible, even if
they didn’t speak to each other, because their presence would in-
crease general stability. Chehab felt that, under a strong presidential
system, the accompanying tendency to immobilisme would not im-
pair policy making. The same lesson could be applied to the new
political elements. As modernization progresses the entire Lebanese
population—educated and uneducated alike—is confronting serious
new problems and learning new doctrines. If a serious economic
crisis in Lebanon promotes social unrest, a system whose represent-
ative institutions are inaccessible to new social forces is in danger.
One does not need to argue that the unemployed liberal-arts major
is a potential revolutionary—though the history of the P.P.S. in
Lebanon and its two attempted coups d’état supports such an argu-
ment—to make the point. An increasing number of educated Leba-

=== PDF_PAGE 277 ===
Trends in Representation + 257
nese see the need for change and have the skills to attack the new
problems but find no way to gain access to the institutions of public
power. An increasing number of the poor and less educated have
become more sensitive to Lebanon’s political shortcomings than
to its political benefits. If the disparities between the formal repre-
sentative institutions and the real political environment are not al-
leviated, one may anticipate worse instability in the future. There
are, as has been indicated, some signs of institutional adjustment.
Under the best of foreseeable circumstances, however, this adjust-
ment will be very limited. The burdens of adaptation and innova-
tion are thus thrust upon the institutions of policy making.

=== PDF_PAGE 278 ===
258 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
NOTES
1The incident is described in detail in the dispatches of the U.S. Diplo-
matic Agent in Beirut, George Wadsworth, in U.S. Department of State,
Foreign Relations of the United States, 1943, IV (Washington, DiC SUS:
Government Printing Office, 1964), 976-80.
2 Camille Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris: Gallimard, 1963), p.
248.
8 The percentage of voter turnout for 1964 would have been even higher
if there had been a formal vote in Beirut’s First District, where 33,574
people voted in 1960. In that district the list headed by Pierre Gemayel and
the Kataeb was so strongly entrenched that there was no opposition. It was
therefore decided that voting would be an empty and expensive formality.
4The reported proportion of actual voters to eligible voters, however, is
somewhat lower (53.3 per cent in 1964) than the proportion of voters to
estimated population. This paradox suggests that population increases are un-
derestimated (confirming a suspicion raised in Chapter 2) or that registration
figures are inflated, a situation owing in part to the retention on the registration
rolls of emigrants, who cannot cast absentee ballots. As emigrants have come
mainly from Beirut and Mount Lebanon, this point would help to explain the
particularly small voter-to-registrant ratio in those districts. The rate of in-
crease in voting participation is therefore a datum of uncertain reliability.
5 William R. Polk, “Social Modernization: The New Men,” in Georgiana
G. Stevens (ed.), The United States and the Middle East (Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964), pp. 30-52.
8 Cf. Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités
du Développement du Liban, Il (Beirut: 1960-1961), 81 (hereafter cited
as IRFED Report); and Chapter 2 of this book.
7 Although not entirely suitable for present purposes, the classifications of
Maurice Duverger, Political Parties (New York: Wiley, 1959) chaps. 1, 2;
and Hisham Sharabi, Government and Politics of the Middle East in the
Twentieth Century (Princeton: Van Nostrand, 1962), chap. 20, are helpful.
SIt has been difficult to adhere to very rigorous criteria in making such
distinctions because the conditions within electoral districts vary a good deal.
In general, an individual is placed in the “strong” category if he receives
more than about 2,500 votes and in the “weak” category if he receives
fewer. Individuals who receive only a handful of votes are generally ex-
cluded. Lists are regarded as strong if they are cohesive—that is, all the
members obtain roughly the same number of votes—and if they are broadly
competitive with the winning list (which is usually classified as strong it-
self). The same rule applies to caucuses, though there can be weak caucus
representation when one member of a caucus group appears on a list. A
contestant (list or individual) earns a strong party rating if the party
dominates the list or if the individual as party member is strong; a weak
party classification is assigned to party members who are primarily benefit-
ing from association with a traditional clique and to those who do poorly.
® Philip W. Buck, Amateurs and Professionals in British Politics, 1918-

=== PDF_PAGE 279 ===
Trends in Representation + 259
1959 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963), pp. 137-8. In 1945,
however, 40 per cent of the members were new entrants.
*0R. Bayly Winder, “Syrian Deputies and Cabinet Ministers, 1919-
1959,” Middle East Journal, 16, No. 4 (1962), 422. Winder remarks,
“Again the theory that underdeveloped countries without. stable party sys-
tems will produce very rapid turnover in elected representation is borne
out.” In Turkey, however, despite an apparently stable party system, the
new-entry rate for the same period was also high, ranging between 32 and
81 per cent. Frederick W. Frey, The Turkish Political Elite (Cambridge,
Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 1965), p. 164. The age
of the particular political system seems to explain the difference most
satisfactorily.
™ According to data received from the former Librarian of Parliament.
The mean age of the thirty-five new entrants in the 1943 Parliament, how-
ever, was virtually the same as that for the twenty-eight new entrants in
1964: They were 44.9 and 44.3 years respectively.
1 The New York Times, January 3, 1965, p. 46.
18 The education figures were compiled from several sources, including
the Library of Parliament, the newspaper L’Orient, the Bureau des Docu-
mentations Libanaises et Arabes, and Who’s Who in Lebanon, 1963-64
(Beirut: Publitec, 1964). The percentage of deputies with higher education
is probably a conservative figure, because it was assumed that individuals
for whom no higher education was reported had therefore received none.
14 For that matter, it is an accurate picture of all the Mandate legisla-
tures. According to Ahmad Haidar’s classification, about 79 per cent of all
the Mandate parliaments were composed of landlords and lawyers, and the
other 30 per cent were businessmen and professionals, mainly doctors. Al-
dawlah al-lubnaniyyah |The Lebanese State] (Beirut: Nijmeh, 1954).
15 The exception was Mrs. Myrna Bustani al-Khazen, who was elected to
fill the seat vacated by her father, Emile Bustani, who died in a plane
crash in April 1963. Her election was uncontested, and she did not stand
for re-election in 1964.
16 This fact reflects the prevailing domination of business and finance by
Christians. A check of the Recueil Documentaire sur les Sociétés en Ac-
tivité au Liban (Beirut: Bureau des Documentations Libanaises et Arabes,
1957) revealed that thirty-six deputies of the independence era were as-
sociated with one or more of the 230 large companies surveyed and that twenty-
six of them were Christian. The Christian domination of big business and
finance is well documented by Yusif Sayigh, Entrepreneurs of Lebanon
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1962), p. 69; he reports that
only one-sixth of his sample of 207 business leaders were Muslims and
that the Muslims were particularly weak in industry, finance, and services.
17 “Modern” is a potentially misleading label. A large number of the depu-
ties who do not belong to a caucus or organized party and who indeed
pride themselves on their “independence” are not only enlightened but are
also in some cases even progressive. It should be recalled that we are at
this point analyzing not attitudes but the ties that link the parliamentary
establishment with the expanding elite outside.

=== PDF_PAGE 280 ===
260 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
18In a well-known Beirut story, a British diplomat remarks to his French
rival: “My poor fellow, you pay millions to buy the voters; then we pay
thousands and buy the deputies.”
19 Iskandar Riachi, Qabl wa-ba‘d (Beirut: Maktabat al-‘arfan, 1953),
chaps. 3, 15, and passim. ;
20 Interview with Henry Pharaon, August 12, 1965. Press censorship, es-
pecially of articles dealing with the Mount Lebanon campaign, is indicative
of the irregular proceedings. Le Jour, August 21-31, 1943.
21 ql-Dabbir, April 28, 1947, p. 5.
22 The Black Book of the 1947 Lebanese Elections (New York: Phoenicia,
1947), translated from the Arabic original, p. 9. The tract was originally
published by the opposition National Bloc.
23 Bechara al-Khoury, Haqd’iqg lubnaniyyah [Lebanese Truths], Il (Bei-
rut: Awraq lubnaniyyah, 1961), 41. Khoury said that the election officers
responsible had taken lessons from the French. His supporter, Michel Chiha,
wrote that these elections were a considerable improvement over 1943
“. . . avaient compté parmi les plus brutales, les plus odieuses que le Liban
ait connues.”” Le Jour, May 27, 1947.
24 Camille Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris: Gallimard, 1963),
pp. 383-5, categorically denies such reports. Calling the elections calm and
fair, he attacks pro-Nasser “mercenaries of the pen” for making untrue
allegations.
25 One observer, a member of the anti-Chamoun front, recalled that the
government intimidated women voters by stationing prostitutes in front of the
polling places. They obstructed women trying to vote; when the women’s
husbands tried to protect them, they were attacked in turn by toughs stationed
nearby. If the husbands resisted the toughs, then the security agents also
present would arrest the husbands.
6 T’Orient, June 18, 1957. In their letter of resignation, they stated rather
cryptically, “malgré le fait que les opérations électorales, du point de vue
administratif, se sont déroulées d’une maniére précise et correcte, nous regret-
tons que l’atmosphére générale et certaines implications ne nous encouragent
pas a continuer notre mission.”
[“. . . (I)n spite of the fact that electoral procedures, from the administra-
tive point of view, were managed in a precise and correct manner, we regret
that the general atmosphere and certain implications do not encourage us to
continue our mission.”]
2” Alexander Heard, The Costs of Democracy (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1960), pp. 373-4.
28 This estimate is based on figures supplied by a former Minister of Na-
tional Economy, who said that a major list usually spends around L£300,000
and that a serious independent candidate spends only slightly less. I reduced
his estimate for major independent candidates to L£100,000 and estimated that
candidates obtaining fewer than 2,000 votes probably spent about L£15,000.
In 1960, there were forty-three electoral lists, thirty-four major independent
candidates, and forty-nine minor independent candidates. The lists spent a
total of L£12,900,000, the major independents L£3,400,000, and the minor

=== PDF_PAGE 281 ===
Trends in Representation + 261
independents L£335,000. The total is L£16,635,000, and the per capita cost
is L£ 8.32.
*® Figures reported in interviews conducted in 1962.
°° Christian Merville in L’Orient, April 28, 1964. Taxi fares and other lo-
gistical problems probably made rural campaigns even more expensive.
*? Ibid. Merville estimated that one-sixth of the typical candidate’s campaign
chest in 1964 went for press publicity, another sixth for illuminated signs and
posters (of which L£6,000 went to the Electricity Office, L£10,000 to store
owners, and L£4,000 to poster artists), an eighth for streamers and banners, a
fifth for campaign offices in various districts, and the bulk—one-third—for
taxis, coffee, and other refreshments. The figures do not include funds allo-
cated for vote buying.
