=== PDF_PAGE 282 ===
CHAPTER - /
Presidential Power: The Struggle
to Dominate
The Presidency is the critical institution in Lebanon’s precariously
balanced political system. The Presidency most clearly mirrors the
Lebanese dilemma, for it is at once the system’s greatest asset and
its greatest liability. Only the President can provide the dynamism
that a rapidly changing country requires. As we have seen, alternative
institutions like the party system and the Chamber of Deputies are
too weak organizationally to supply this dynamism. It is precisely
this possible dynamism, however, that makes the President the
greatest threat to Lebanon’s pluralistic balance, even though the
maintenance of this balance requires the constant help of the Presi-
dent. Each of independent Lebanon’s first three Presidents was con-
demned for being ineffectual, and each was condemned for being
dictatorial. Each President lacked the power to govern the country
properly and worked incessantly to develop this power. Domestic
and external cross pressures plus inadequately developed intermediate
and nontraditional organizations—parties, interest groups, political
clubs, and autonomous local governments—made these efforts to
develop a power base seem heavy handed. The same circum-
stances that require increasing Presidential authority make the
President increasingly authoritarian because there are no sufficiently
institutionalized power bases to check Presidential power. In the
Lebanese context, dictatorship inevitably leads to crisis. Yet the
President cannot escape his predicament by refusing to act, much as
he might prefer such a solution; nothing could be more dangerous to
volatile, modernizing Lebanon than a weak President.
The crucial test for the Lebanese Republic is whether or not it
can build a Presidency that is not only powerful enough to make and
262

=== PDF_PAGE 283 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 263
implement wise policies but is also one that can function without
destroying traditional pluralism. It is by no means certain that this
task can be accomplished. The record of the Republic’s first three
Presidents suggests that, although it may be possible, it is certainly
very difficult.
The Lebanese Presidents have employed three strategies to build
their power. They have systematically enlarged the administrative
apparatus, a governmental domain over which they have had vir-
tually unlimited control. Not until the Chehab regime was a civil-
service board created, and it reflects legislative rather than Presi-
dential influence over the administration. In enlarging the administra-
tion, they have enhanced their bargaining power vis-a-vis local and
primordial interests, through the allocation of patronage. Adminis-
trative development has also served as an instrument of social justice,
particularly since 1958; the Chehab regime was distinguished by its
emphasis on using administrative apparatus to serve the interests of
the poor, non-Christian, and rural groups to a greater extent than
the earlier regimes had done. The second Presidential strategy has
been strictly political. Lebanese Presidents have been both adroit and
aggressive in their attempts (against considerable odds) to build a
Presidential coalition among the notables. But the Presidents have
increasingly attempted to use a third strategy. They have bypassed
the notables to build their own power among other groups. It is the
Presidents who have given some influence to the nonpolitical pro-
fessionals, who have pulled nonparliamentarians into cabinets and
administration, who have tried to win the support of some organized
groups outside the establishment, and who have developed followings
among the ordinary people.
Each of the first three Presidents after 1943 developed his own
style for handling the special problems of his time. President Bechara
al-Khoury’s overriding task was to secure national independence.
He began his term with no army and only a rudimentary administra-
tion, and he had to face the uncertainties of international politics and
the domestic crises brought about by the conclusion of World War
IL and Lebanon’s newly won independence. Lacking solid institu-
tional power, he employed his formidable personal influence and
negotiating skill to keep the fragile state intact. President Camille
Chamoun was a fighter. He was challenged from inside and outside
the state, and he had to develop new bases of power. Ultimately his
efforts to build influence as a major Arab leader foundered, the
notables he recruited lacked adequate traditional support, and the

=== PDF_PAGE 284 ===
264 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
organized groups he relied on in the 1958 crisis (the P.P.S. and
the Kataeb) were neutralized by equally well-organized opposition
from other groups, but the expansion of administration begun by
Chamoun was considerable, and it gave his successor something to
build on. President Fuad Chehab appears as a kind of political car-
penter, repairing an edifice that had split apart and building on top
of it the skeleton, at least, of a modern state.
THE Kyoury REGIME: EXPLOITING TRADITIONAL PLURALISM
The man who did most to achieve Lebanon’s independence from
France and to establish the viability of the new state was also, in
the opinion of many, its most accomplished politician. Bechara al-
Khoury, short in stature but commanding in presence, developed
procedures for integrating Lebanon’s semi-independent notables into
the political system; and he accomplished it all at a time when the
instruments of the state itself were only poorly developed. As an
administrator Khoury was less than successful; indeed, it was his ad-
ministrative failings that precipitated his removal in 1952. As a
politician, however, he not only guided Lebanon through the painful
process of disengagement from France and into harmony with the
other new Arab states, but he also exploited the country’s traditional
pluralism to create a presidential party, the Constitutional Bloc
(Destour), and a means for regularizing change. His main instru-
ment was the device of cabinet change.
It is difficult at first to accept the idea that the cabinet-change
process has contributed anything positive to Lebanese politics. There
were, after all, thirty-six changes of government between September
1943 and July 1965. Collective responsibility for policy is a rule
more honored in the breach than in the application because of the
absence of a strong party system. Cabinet ministers rarely bring to
their ministries appropriate technical qualifications and administra-
tive leadership, and the administration is left to the supervision of
civil servants who are hobbled by political pressures. Because the
Lebanese Prime Minister lacks independence, authority, and tenure,
he has been typically only primus inter pares and has been tactically
inclined to avoid initiatives for fear of weakening his coalition. By
conventional criteria, the Council of Ministers stands as one of the
weakest institutions in Lebanese politics. Liberal critics never tire

=== PDF_PAGE 285 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 265
of pointing out its inadequacies in terms of the needs of a modern,
rational political system.1
Although there is much truth in their criticism, it is important for
purposes of analysis to consider the possibility that the process of
cabinet change does serve an important function. During the Khoury
regime the Lebanese state was little more than an uneasy federation
_ Of traditional chiefs commanding a bureaucracy pitifully inadequate
for anything more than custodial functions—that is, maintaining a
minimum of civil order—yet saddled with the need to curb inflation,
to supply scarce wheat, to eliminate French control of vital services,
and to put down communist-inspired labor unrest. Under these cir-
cumstances the first priority was to consolidate national independ-
ence. Starting with little more than the appeal of his strong per-
sonality, President Khoury institutionalized traditional rivalries in
the cabinet process. He did so by including the major traditional
power holders in the cabinet and thus giving them a stake in the
system. In so doing, he maneuvered himself into the position of
arbiter. He also gained necessary time to build up an administra-
tive base, although he did so less to fulfill any popular demands for
expanded government services than to expand his options as head
of state. The primary criterion for evaluating Lebanese institutions
in the first critical years is their contribution to basic stability and
consolidation. Later on, other criteria such as efficiency, incorrupti-
bility, and social justice assume greater importance. Khoury’s use
of the cabinet, an institution of Western liberal democracy, to
achieve the first goal was masterly; his failure to adapt it to meet
the other criteria eventually led his regime to political disaster. Under
his successors the cabinet process continued to play the same im-
portant integrating role, but it had to be supplemented by new in-
stitutions and processes for the system to meet the other standards
that were increasingly applied to it.
How did the cabinet process as used by President Khoury pro-
mote national solidarity? First, he used it to give important tradi-
tional leaders a stake in the state apparatus. This move was es-
sential because of the initially weak formal position of the President
and because the population was not yet politically oriented toward
Beirut but had powerful ties to the various notables whose local
positions were nearly invulnerable. Second, it kept the traditional
power holders themselves in a reasonably stable equilibrium and
discouraged overt rivalries through a ritual of change known to its

=== PDF_PAGE 286 ===
266 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
critics as “musical chairs,” by which portfolios were regularly redis-
tributed in order that the many deserving notables be given an
opportunity to support the regime actively. The musical-chairs
process was—and is—an excellent means for keeping the notables
involved in the success or failure of the government yet so un-
balanced and disorganized that they could not easily combine against
the President. President Khoury was emulated, but never surpassed,
by his successors, who also rewarded notables who cooperated with
the regime. Khoury understood the uses of patronage, and he took
full advantage of the fact that every important politician in Lebanon
has numerous clients to serve and debts to repay. Corruption was the
inevitable price of cooperation.
Third, the cabinet functioned as a protective buffer for the Presi-
dent and the fragile national unity that he symbolized. In this respect,
Khoury was much more successful with his cabinets than his succes-
sors were. Because during his term the nontraditional political in-
frastructure was relatively primitive, a cabinet of “giants”—acknowl-
edged sectarian and financial leaders of national reputation and
influence—conferred sufficient legitimacy on a government whose
activity was relatively restricted. With the flowering of radical groups
outside the establishment and the growing factionalism within it
during the Chamoun regime, the cabinet became considerably less
effective as a buffer. Under General Chehab, who hardly needed a
buffer at all, the cabinet was not very important. Fourth, because
the cabinet was weak in policy making and administration, the
President had a free hand in making decisions. President Khoury
was somewhat less effective in exploiting this possibility than his suc-
cessors were, partly because the notables in his cabinets individually
enjoyed considerable power and partly because he permitted certain
members of his own entourage to build up their personal power in
the administration.
President Khoury was greatly aided in his efforts to consolidate
power by the legacy of the French Mandate. The Constitution gives
the President sweeping power over Parliament and cabinet.? The
President names a prime minister who in turn must form a cabinet
that will hold the confidence of Parliament. In theory, both Presi-
dent and cabinet are responsible to the Parliament. In practice, how-
ever, the President plays a commanding role because he has the
power to promulgate “urgent” and “double urgent” legislation by
decree (Article 58);° to veto bills (Article 27); to dissolve the Par-
liament (Article 55); and to appoint and dismiss the Prime Minister

=== PDF_PAGE 287 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 267
and the cabinet (Article 53). As a result, it has always been the
President, not the Parliament, who has brought down governments.
Parliament is never in a position to withhold confidence from a
cabinet that has the blessing of both President and Prime Minister
because its own organization is primitive, based as it is on personal
cliques and regional blocs, and because the President exerts powerful
influence over the parliamentary election process. The President
therefore has been able to manipulate the formation of cabinets as a
means to keep the notables as a group in line, which leaves him a free
hand to manage the country’s affairs. Nor have prime ministers and
cabinets been able to initiate legislative programs without presidential
backing. This development has not pleased Sunnite politicians. Com-
pared to the President, the Prime Minister has a tenure that is in-
deed precarious: A president has a fixed term of six years, whereas
a government lasts for about 6.5 months; three men have been Presi-
dent in the first two decades of independence; during the same period
there have been nine different prime ministers (not counting in-
terim prime ministers), of whom only three remained in office for
periods longer than fourteen months.*
Within four years President Khoury had developed his political
superiority to such an extent that he could persuade Parliament
without difficulty to amend the Constitution to permit him a second
term. The Parliament, for reasons discussed earlier, was in no mood
to resist his request. Although neither of Khoury’s two immediate
successors actually requested a renewal of their terms of office, there
is no doubt that Parliament would have provided it had they done so.
In order to assess Bechara al-Khoury’s performance as a con-
solidator of national power, to compare it with that of his suc-
cessors, and to obtain a better idea of the development of the
Presidency as an institution, it will be helpful to describe a typical
case of cabinet change.
At the end of March 1946 the Cabinet of Sami Sulh had begun
to disintegrate. The disintegration had been precipitated by rivalries
within the Lebanese delegation in Paris negotiating the terms of
the French troop withdrawal. One of the delegates was the popular
Sunnite leader, Riad Sulh, anxious to use his role in negotiating
the agreement as a means to return to power. Another delegate was
Yussef Salem (Greek Catholic), Sulh’s friend and co-lister from
South Lebanon, who was the Interior Minister; another was Hamid
Frangieh, the Maronite Foreign Minister.” Salem was persuaded to
quit his cabinet post upon his return to Beirut, ostensibly on the

=== PDF_PAGE 288 ===
268 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
grounds that his plans for reform were being frustrated, and it was
rumored that Frangieh would follow him.* The days of Sami
Sulh’s cabinet seemed numbered, and the two major opposition
factions, both of which were dissatisfied with their weak cabinet
representation, began maneuvers to gain control of the next gov-
ernment. The Destourians, led by Philippe Taqla, Wadih Naim,
Farid Khazen, and Majid Arslan, were one of the competing fac-
tions. The other was the Independent Bloc, led by Abdel-Hamid
Karami, Henri Pharaon, Ahmad al-Assaad, and Abdallah Yafi. At
issue was the office of Prime Minister: The Destourians were willing
to continue their alliance with the powerful Riad Sulh, whereas the
Independents (who included two aspirants for the post of Prime
Minister) were anxious to keep Riad Sulh out of office, as they
were suspicious of his ultimate aims in foreign policy. Only a rela-
tive neutral like Sami Sulh could head a cabinet that would not
completely alienate one of these two important factions. Sami Sulh
could try to maintain his present cabinet, replace the defectors, and
then go before Parliament for a vote of confidence, or he could
take his amputated Council of Ministers before Parliament im-
mediately. Because he preferred the first alternative, he began to
search for replacements to fill the empty positions. At that point,
sectarian and regional factors came into play. To fill the vacancies
created by Frangieh and Salem, it was necessary to find a Maronite
notable from Mount Lebanon and a Greek Catholic, preferably
from the Biqa. The two most prominent candidates were Philippe
Taqla (Greek Catholic) and Yussef Istaphan (Maronite). Taqla,
however, would not join a cabinet unless his Destour colleague,
Majid Arslan (Druze), was also made a minister; but Sami Sulh
could not include Amir Majid without displacing the incumbent
Druze, Dr. Jamil Talhouk. Such a move would upset the Druze
followers of Kamal Jumblat. Kamal Jumblat, meanwhile, was on
the verge of throwing his support to the Karami-Pharaon Inde-
pendents, if that faction would promise to stand behind a strong
reform program. Furthermore, because Gabriel Murr, the Greek
Orthodox Public Works Minister, was also in sympathy with the
Jumblat group, to replace Talhouk would be to risk Murr’s resigna-
tion. There was also opposition to Istaphan’s appointment, which
would alienate the Abdel-Hamid Karami faction; it might then
retaliate by pulling out the Justice Minister, Saadi Munla (Sun-
nite of Tripoli), and perhaps three other ministers as well. Sami
Sulh could have then started all over again, but solution would

=== PDF_PAGE 289 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 269
hardly have been easier. On April 9, however, Sulh’s cabinet was
reprieved when Philippe Taqla agreed to join as the Greek Catholic
representative without insisting on a portfolio for Majid Arslan
and President Khoury persuaded Hamid Frangieh not to resign.’
These repairs only postponed the crisis for a few weeks how-
ever. The negotiations with France had been handled satisfactorily,
_but the government’s handling of the domestic situation was under
incessant attack from a disorganized but growing opposition of
notables. Riad Sulh and his associates were anxious to return to
Lebanon, but the other opposition group, the Independents, led
by Abdel-Hamid Karami and Henri Pharaon, would not accept a
cabinet with Riad Sulh as Prime Minister. There were also sharp
differences between Karami and Pharaon themselves over the kind
of electoral reforms that they wanted the government to undertake.
Karami strongly advocated a single-member system based on the
Lebanese administrative districts, and Pharaon, whose own in-
fluence was greatly enhanced by the “Grand List,” based on the
larger geographic divisions of the five provinces, opposed it. Seek-
ing to improve his position, Karami changed the name of his group
from the Independents to the Reform Bloc. By this maneuver, he
gained the support of a number of powerful leaders, some of whom
were known for their reformist ideas.* These notables, acting in a
“nonpartisan” manner, presented President Khoury with a petition
that charged, among other things, that the domestic situation re-
quired a complete overhaul, including a reduction of the administra-
tive apparatus and expenditures; the creation of coherent, trained
administrative and military cadres; an office for auditing administra-
tive accounts; a new electoral law; modern social legislation; and a
campaign against unemployment.’ President Khoury was also at-
tacked by the opposing faction. Yussef Salem, a friend of Riad Sulh,
continued his efforts to undermine the cabinet by publicly prophesy-
ing that Lebanon would be ruined if public and private expenditures
did not decrease. With the more than 20,000 workers once dependent
upon the Allied armies now unemployed and the termination of
the foreign military expenditures that had been running to $40
million annually during World War II, a stronger government than
that of Sami Sulh was necessary.’
On May 9 a new crisis was precipitated, when Majid Arslan, a
close ally of Khoury in the Destour and a hero of the Lebanese
resistance in 1943, made a violent attack on the notables’ petition.
This act prodded his traditional Druze rival Jumblat, one of the

=== PDF_PAGE 290 ===
270 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
signers, into retorting that Arslan was a traitor. A duel was nar-
rowly averted.1! A week later the campaign against Sami Sulh’s
cabinet reached its climax. Ranged against Sulh and his ministers
were Riad Sulh and his friends, Habib Abuchahla, Yussef Salem,
Hamid Frangieh, Kazem Khalil, and Adel Osseiran, and the six
deputies of Khoury’s own grouping, the Destour.’? The other op-
position group, the reformist coalition, still divided by the problem
of electoral districting, included at that point Abdel-Hamid Karami,
Henri Pharaon, Alfred Naccache, Kamal Jumblat, Saeb Salam, Saadi
Munla, and Abdallah Yafi. Meanwhile, President Khoury, whose
followers wanted to remove Sami Sulh from the prime ministership,
acted as a supposedly neutral mediator and listened patiently to the
complaints of various notables and waited for the government to
fall. On May 17 the three ministerial allies of the Karami group,
Jamil Talhouk, Saadi Munla, and Ahmad Assaad, submitted their
resignations, and Sami Sulh’s cabinet collapsed.”
The process of forming a Lebanese cabinet is hardly less By-
zantine than that of destroying one; but, although President Khoury
could simply bide his time and wait for the accumulation of rival-
ries to undermine the government, he had to use his power posi-
tively to put a new one together. This tedious task was made easier
by the fact that the opposition was chronically so divided that
individual notables could usually be tempted to forget their old
affiliations in return for a portfolio. Khoury writes that he offered
his friend Riad Sulh the post of Minister of State but that Riad
would accept only on the condition that Khoury also admit a num-
FIGURE 4. Prime Minister (Left)
and President. SNW w
AMS
AyR e2) " 6
AAys ‘e
ZF
SS

=== PDF_PAGE 291 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 271
ber of his friends.’* Although the reformists agreed on their opposi-
tion to a cabinet controlled by Riad Sulh and his friends, they
could not reach a compromise on the reforms they wished to under-
take. When President Khoury consulted with Abdel-Hamid Karami
and ingenuously asked him to submit the program his group sup-
ported, Karami could therefore only temporize and tyes that the
majority of his group did not yet agree with the group’s written
platform.” The reform faction could not even agree on a candidate
for Prime Minister among its Sunnite members. Some observers
believed that a cabinet of “giants,” consisting of Riad Sulh, Pharaon,
Karami (as Prime Minister), Camille Chamoun (who immediately
left his diplomatic post in London), Habib Abuchahla, and Ahmad
al-Assaad, would emerge. Even had Riad Sulh been content to play
second fiddle to Karami or had Pharaon been willing to sit in the
same cabinet with Riad Sulh or had Habib Abuchahla been pre-
pared to work with Pharaon or had Khoury himself been interested
in accepting Camille Chamoun, there still would have been the
question of selecting the Druze representative. Riad Sulh and the
Destour insisted that Majid Arslan participate in any cabinet with
them, but Karami’s Reform Bloc and other reformists preferred
the more socially conscious Jumblat. It would not be possible to do
without a prominent Druze in any Lebanese cabinet, and it was
equally unthinkable that Jumblat and Arslan could both be ap-
pointed in light of their recent battle in Parliament.
The deadlock gave the President considerable leverage. Khoury
used it with his customary skill to form a cabinet that effectively
| ge
iV) €
ate &
by

=== PDF_PAGE 292 ===
272 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
blunted the formidable offensive of the reformists. For the office of
Prime Minister he suggested Saadi Munla, who was not the strong-
est leader in the reformist faction.1* Khoury then put together a
cabinet containing three associates of the reformists (Munla,
Yussef Hraoui, and Saeb Salam) but excluding such major reform
figures as Karami, Pharaon, Naccache, and Jumblat. Furthermore,
Khoury neutralized the three reformists by also including four
allies or friends of Riad Sulh and the Destour: Emile Lahoud,
Philippe Taqla, Majid Arslan, and Ahmad Husseini. President
Khoury had deflected the reformist thrust by creating a weak cab-
inet. When this cabinet fell apart seven months later, the domestic
situation had become so disorganized that a cabinet of “giants” was
an urgent necessity. On December 14, 1946, seven days after
Munla’s cabinet had collapsed, President Khoury and Riad Sulh
put together a new and stronger combination, initiating a five-year
period of ministerial continuity.”
Such was the style of cabinet politics during the Khoury regime.
The President exploited traditional rivalries with consummate skill,
turning the inherent weakness of the new state to his advantage. In
this difficult task he had the good fortune and good sense to be
associated with an outstanding Sunnite leader, Riad Sulh. As long
as Sulh was in tandem with Khoury, the underlying sectarian ten-
sion was low—probably lower than before or since—for most
Sunnites felt that they were being strongly represented by an Arab
nationalist of great stature. Sulh’s positive contribution to this state
of affairs was expressed by President Khoury’s leading press critic,
Georges Naccache, in the following terms:
Pourquoi nous sommes riadistes? Parce que, compte tenu de ses
qualités et de ses défauts—des changes et des risques qu’il exprime
—M. Riad Sulh se situe, dans le nouvel équilibre libanais, au centre
méme de tout notre systéme politique. A quoi tient le privilége?
Moins peut-étre au génie propre et aux vertus du personnage qu’a un
ensemble d’éléments qui ont joué et continuent de jouer en sa faveur.
Sa personalité, son passé, sa position intérieure, ses relations inter-
nationales—tout le jeu subtil enfin des impondérables qui se cristal-
lisent autour de lui—contribuent a faire de ce personnage un person-
nage nécessaire.1§
With time, however, the Khoury-Sulh style proved increasingly dif-
ficult to maintain. Not only was it impossible to satisfy all the de-
mands of the notables, but it was also impossible to avoid ultimately

=== PDF_PAGE 293 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 273
alienating them by superficially successful clever maneuvers. Still,
the President might well have served out his second term—in spite
of the domestic corruption, the Palestine problem, and the radicali-
zation of politics—had he been able to maintain his alliance with
Riad Sulh. Their separation and then Sulh’s assassination in July
1951 eroded Khoury’s support among the Sunnite masses. Lack-
ing protection from the Sunnite notables he had so cleverly ex-
cluded in the past, Khoury lasted for only fourteen months before
the inexorable factionalism of Lebanese politics brought upon him
a cabinet crisis that he could not solve.
THE CHAMOUN REGIME: ADJUSTING TO THE NEW RADICALISM
Before 1952 Lebanese politics was like chess, and the President was
a master player facing a divided opposition on the institutional
chessboard; for six years after 1952, it was closer to war, and the
President was a commander trying desperately to eliminate his op-
ponents from the field. In the cabinet crises of the 1950s, popular
reform, socialism, Arab nationalism, relations with the West, and
sectarian strife figured to an extent unknown during Khoury’s
regime. One crude indicator of President Chamoun’s difficulties is
the fact that the governments during his tenure average only six
months in duration, compared with a figure of nine months for
cabinets during the previous regime.”
As a politician, President Chamoun was admirably suited for
carrying on presidential politics in the style of his predecessor. He
belonged to President Khoury’s generation of liberal nationalists; he
was only six years younger and had been raised in the same milieu.
He too had suffered at the hands of the Turks; he too had a legal
background; and he too was, from the moment of his entrance into
politics in 1929, a Maronite who aspired to a prominent role.” As
a member of the new political elite under the Mandate, Chamoun
must have learned a great deal about factional politics both from
the French and his own colleagues and rivals. From the moment
he entered national politics he was a popular figure in Mount Leb-
anon, and particularly around his home town of Deir al-Qamar. As
a Destourian he identified himself with the most progressive stand
on national independence, but as a personality he always preferred
to associate the Destour with himself rather than himself with the
Destour. This individualism, so characteristic of Lebanese politics,

=== PDF_PAGE 294 ===
274 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
had by 1943 forced Chamoun into direct, though still covert,
rivalry with Khoury. In fact, Chamoun was for a time the only
candidate for President in 1943; his candidacy had been used as
a “compromise” between Bechara al-Khoury and Emile Edde.**
With a strong local following of his own and the backing of
British diplomats, the ambitious Chamoun was, from 1943 on, a
more serious rival to President Khoury than anybody from outside
the Constitutional Bloc. Posted to London in August 1944 under
French pressure, Chamoun’s political isolation was a blessing in
disguise, for it kept him free of the growing corruption surrounding
the new regime’s attempt to develop an indigenous administration.”
Camille Chamoun permanently returned to Lebanon early in 1947
at a politically auspicious moment. Opposition groups both inside
and outside the establishment were beginning to exert pressures on
the Khoury regime: The Syrian National Party (P.P.S.), to whom
Chamoun in his capacity as Interior Minister had issued a license
in 1944, was about to welcome home its founder, Antoun Saadeh,
and to launch a campaign against the government; the communists
had made greater inroads in the labor movement than before or
since; Kamal Jumblat was casting about for a means of reforming
the state, and Khoury believed that he was playing a highly destructive
role both inside the government and outside it; Emile Edde, though
certainly no friend of Chamoun, shared his interest in a change of
regime; and Abdel-Hamid Karami remained impatient to see the
end of a regime that, in his words, exploited Lebanon as if it
were a family fief. All these domestic complaints had as background
the Palestine struggle, then drawing to a climax. Chamoun had dis-
tinguished himself for diplomatic service against the Zionist move-
ment through his activities in London and as one of the most im-
portant spokesmen for the Arabs at the United Nations. This
service added to Chamoun’s political luster, assured him of support
from Arab nationalists and Muslims, and offset to some extent his
reputation as a man of the British; a year later, when the war had
been lost, he was one of the few Arab politicians to survive with
reputation intact. By spring 1947, the regime’s unpopularity must
have been apparent to a politician with Khoury’s astuteness; the
1947 elections were thus particularly important. Chamoun _par-
tially succeeded in splitting the Destour in Mount Lebanon by in-
sisting that he would never run on the same list with the President’s
brother, but the Khoury machine still retained enough controlo f

=== PDF_PAGE 295 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 275
the situation to engineer a constitutional amendment and the re-
election of the President a year later.2*
The crisis that forced President Khoury to step down halfway
through his second term brought Camille Chamoun to the Presi-
dency. As one of the leaders of the Socialist National Front,
Chamoun had been instrumental in mobilizing the opposition to
_ Khoury. His only opponent, Hamid Frangieh, withdrew before the
election.** By then, however, the tide of reformist opinion and the
undercurrent of Arab nationalist unrest that had contributed to
Khoury’s success had already begun to turn against him. In addi-
tion to the classic game of cabinet politics, Chamoun thus had to
struggle with the notables of the Socialist National Front who had
put him in power, because he would neither go to the extremes
they advocated nor share power with them. His predecessor had
completed a full term before having to worry about these assorted
radicals. Furthermore, whereas President Khoury had kept his
lines of communication open both to the Arab states and to the
West, President Chamoun found it an impossible task, largely be-
cause of the introduction of the Cold War into the Arab world with
the decline of British influence, American efforts to establish a
Middle Eastern NATO, the flareup of the Palestine problem, and
the Soviet Union’s arms deals with Egypt and Syria. By splitting
the Arab world and Lebanon itself into pro-Western and anti-
Western blocs the United States and Britain presented Chamoun
with a dilemma: Lebanese commitment to either side would be
interpreted as a violation of the National Pact by the other, and
representatives of each side within Lebanon were powerful enough
to destroy the Lebanese equilibrium. The political institutions of
the state were put to this test during Chamoun’s term, and the
surprising fact is that they contained the forces of crisis until the
last four months, despite a series of tactical errors on the part of
the President.
Reformist Pressures and Presidential Response
President Khoury had come to power with a mandate to complete
Lebanese independence and to build an efficient administration.
His success in the first task is incontestable; not only did he ease
the French out with skill, speed, and reasonable amity, but he
also established a system of political relationships that institution-
alized establishment rivalries. In the second task he failed, and

=== PDF_PAGE 296 ===
276 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
administrative corruption became so flagrant that the fragmented
opposition succeeded in combining temporarily to force the Pres-
ident out. President Chamoun came to power indebted to these
reformers. He thus could not simply play the cabinet game of his
predecessor; on the other hand, he could not opt out of cabinet
politics, however distasteful they may have seemed, because the
cabinet process was the only orderly way of handling the various
rivalries and also an important instrument for building his own
power. Just as the wish for independence had strengthened the
Presidency during Khoury’s first term, so did the need for reform
give President Chamoun a potential means of support. Although
completing independence was to the interest of all the establish-
ment, reforming the government and administration was not; in
fact, a substantial bloc of ex-Destourians and other friends of the
old regime looked upon reform with outright dismay. The radical
groups that had been so important in Chamoun’s election quickly
proved to be too extreme for his taste in their demands for power
and policy changes.
Faced with a very difficult situation at his accession to power,
President Chamoun thus lost the support both of the reform move-
ment and the traditional politicians. Scarcely a year after his in-
auguration, when the first ramifications of the Cold War conflict
hit Lebanon, the President’s domestic weakness forced him into
hostile defensive maneuvers and encouraged his foreign and domes-
tic enemies to acts of greater boldness. Chamoun did not overcome
the problems that faced him, and his determination to strengthen
the Presidency only aggravated them. In fact, the combination of
this attempt to increase Presidential power and the inability to
achieve basic reforms helped bring about the strange alliance of
feudal bosses and progressive elements that opposed him in 1958.
His partial success led to national disaster.
To illustrate the immobilisme resulting from the collision of the
radical progressives and the traditional elements, it is only necessary
to examine President Chamoun’s first attempts to establish cabinets.
The President had been in office scarcely a week when it became
clear that the most radical of the leftists—the Kamal Jumblat
group, recent allies of Chamoun in deposing President Khoury—
wanted nothing less than control of the next cabinet. It also sought
promises for reforms that went far beyond what Chamoun or the non-
leftists in the reform coalition—not to mention the majority of former
loyalists in Parliament—would accept. Jumblat’s Socialist National

=== PDF_PAGE 297 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 277
Front demanded the nationalization of important industries, redis-
tribution of the large land estates among tenant farmers, a social-
security program, and the use of surplus public funds for social
and economic projects.» Chamoun first tapped Dr. Abdallah Yafi
as the logical first choice for Prime Minister. Yafi had a liberal
reputation, and he had been jettisoned a year before as President
_Khoury’s Prime Minister by the faction of the Destour headed by
the President’s brother. Yafi, however, could not form a cabinet ac-
ceptable both to Chamoun and to the old Parliament, in which the
S.N.F. would hold five seats. Other leaders also demanded seats:
Ahmad al-Assaad, South Lebanon’s political boss, for example, in-
sisted that his relation Sabri Hamadeh—a loyal friend of the Des-
tour—be included, but Jumblat would not accept any prominent
members of the old ruling establishment.°
Chamoun then turned to another relatively neutral Sunnite,
Saadi Munla of Tripoli, who had been associated with the late
Abdel-Hamid Karami; but he too found the S.N.F. intractable,
even though he offered a program that promised administrative re-
form, electoral reform at the parliamentary and municipal levels,
and a liberal press law. When Munla also failed to form a cabinet,
Chamoun called upon Abdel-Hamid Karami’s son Rashid, who was
known to be more strongly committed to reform and to solidarity
with the Arab world than the others were; but because Rashid
Karami’s proposed cabinet was manned exclusively by opposition
members, it was vetoed in advance by the pro-Khoury parliamentary
majority. Furthermore, the right wing of the reform coalition, led by
Pierre Edde of the National Bloc, was unwilling to participate in
the same government with a radical socialist like Abdallah Hajj of
the S.N.F.?” Finally, when nerves were stretched to the breaking
point, President Chamoun called in Amir Khaled Chehab, the
venerable veteran of Mandate politics and an early associate of
the Destour. Khaled Chehab succeeded in forming a four-man
cabinet of nonparliamentarians, and he obtained sweeping decree
powers from the Parliament.’* The reformists spoke in behalf of
antisectarianism, compulsory voting, investigating the income
sources of deputies, women’s suffrage, a new census, and land
reform. The new government declared that it intended to reform
the electoral law on the basis of small, single-member districts,
liberalize the press law; give the vote to women; reform the judici-
ary; and decentralize and reform the administration. This bold
move threw both the old Destourians and the radicals off balance,

=== PDF_PAGE 298 ===
278 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
and the cabinet was ultimately approved by sixty-five to one, with
two abstentions.”
Presidential response to the calls for reform was vigorous in in-
tent, if not in execution. Nicknamed “the government of the decree
laws,” Amir Khaled’s regime, with President Chamoun’s vigorous
backing, issued some ninety. different decrees in the field of ad-
ministrative reform alone during its six-month exercise of emergency
powers.®° President Chamoun singles out this administrative reform
as one of the most important accomplishments of the Khaled
Chehab cabinet because it simplified and clearly defined the func-
tions and responsibilities of all civil servants.** The other important
accomplishments were the judicial reform, which, Chamoun claims,
finally gave Lebanon an independent judiciary; the liberalization
of the press law, which under the Khoury regime had been used
to detain opposition journalists and to shut down their newspapers;
and the electoral reform.*”
Whatever the real merits of Chamoun’s first reform effort—they
will be discussed shortly—the political results were hardly encour-
aging. The general reshuffling of general directors and administra-
tive streamlining was regarded with dismay by those whose tradi-
tional access to the bureaucracy had been cut off, whereas the
extreme left found the whole operation insufficiently comprehensive.
Only two weeks after the cabinet had been installed, one deputy
accused the government of dragging its feet.*® A parliamentary in-
terpellation on the government’s administrative policy on February
19, 1953, was highly critical of the administrative reform, even
though confidence was again granted to the Khaled Chehab cabinet;
the S.N.F. was also reportedly becoming restive.** Outside Parlia-
ment the new political alignment caused even bigger disturbances.
In South Lebanon clashes occurred between partisans of the S.N.F.
progressives and the followers of Ahmad al-Assaad at Taybeh
and Kab-Elias, and al-Assaad also accused members of Jumblat’s
P.S.P. of trying to kill him.** Another fight broke out between the
partisans of Kamal Jumblat and followers of Majid Arslan.** The
reform effort seemed to be exacerbating rather than reducing politi-
cal conflict. Sectarian strife also threatened, and the Hay’at al-
Watania joined with Sunnite organizations in Saida and Tripoli to
complain that Sunnites were not getting a proper share of new
appointments in the administrative reshuffle. At the same time,
three of the leading Sunnite establishment figures, Sami Sulh, Ab-
dallah Yafi, and Saeb Salam, called for a constitutional amendment

=== PDF_PAGE 299 ===
Le
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 279
to limit the President’s powers and create a Muslim Vice-Presi-
dency.**
In addition to these complications, other problems created by a
movement for economic unity with Syria virtually paralyzed the
government, and the task of actually pushing through the reforms
was left to President Chamoun. By the end of February the notables,
_ traditional and reformist, who had been excluded from power, were
hovering like vultures over the Khaled Chehab government, plotting
in classic fashion the composition of its successor. Khaled Chehab
resigned on April 29, fourteen days after the expiration of his
cabinet’s emergency powers, after severe attacks both from old
Destourians and radical leftists in Parliament.** President Chamoun’s
political honeymoon—if it can be called that—was over; the ex-
perience showed President Chamoun that reform without the nota-
bles was difficult, and it also showed that government without the
politicians was impossible. The President learned from this experi-
ence and turned to an experienced establishment Sunnite, Saeb
Salam, to form the next cabinet; the struggle of traditional rivals
and progressive factions began again. Druze against Druze; Destour
against National Bloc; Arab nationalist against Lebanese conserva-
tive; nonsectarians against clerical interference; divisions within
radical factions—all the familiar conflicts were still present. It is
not surprising that Chamoun realized immediately that he would
have to have another parliament in order to establish stable rule.
The new Parliament, even though it had been elected under the
Chamoun reform law, did not make President Chamoun’s second
reform campaign any easier or more successful than the first one
because, even though it contained a few new faces, it was still
composed of notables pursuing parochial and private interests. The
second reform drive was launched during autumn 1954 in an
atmosphere charged with foreign and sectarian tensions—additional
complications in a situation already complicated enough with tradi-
tional and social-justice demands. Neither the new Parliament nor
Chamoun’s own polished demeanor had mollified the hard-core
opposition. Sunnites of the establishment were increasingly critical
of the President’s ambivalence on foreign policy; Destourians were
regrouping to undo the reforms already enacted; the Hay’at al-
Watania and Najjadeh were pressing for a census; and a Committee
of Political Parties, created in February 1954, was attempting to
coordinate the opposition.*® Although the S.N.F. had_ suffered
major defections the year before, when Emile Bustani, Dicran

=== PDF_PAGE 300 ===
280 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Tosbath, and Ghassan Tueni had declined to support Jumblat’s
assaults on President Chamoun, its hard core continued to oppose
the President, and the National Bloc refused to give the regime
unqualified support. On September 16, 1954, President Chamoun
called on Sami Sulh to form a government, after the efforts of
Abdallah Yafi, who had been Prime Minister in the two previous
weak governments, had failed. Again, the cabinet was granted
emergency-decree powers for a limited period. Under the new re-
form program, one American and two Dutch administration ex-
perts were brought in, a civil-service board was established, and
the groundwork was laid for a national school of public administra-
tion.*? As before, unfortunately, the reform only excited more
political opposition than support. By the end of May 1955 the
new decree laws were the object of sustained attacks by Raymond
and Pierre Edde of the National Bloc; Hamid Frangieh, Chamoun’s
defeated Presidential rival; and Abdallah Yafi, recently Chamoun’s
Prime Minister.*t On a single day in July, four newspapers, rang-
ing in political orientation from the far right to the far left, attacked
the government’s “inane” reform efforts.** The cabinet itself, after
barely exceeding the six-month average life span,.was beginning to
disintegrate: At the end of May the Justice Minister, Charles
Helou, quit during a debate on the decree laws, taking with him
the support of moderate financiers and ex-Destourians, and in July
a dispute over the appointment of an ambassador to Paris neces-
sitated a major reshuffle of the Sulh cabinet.** The conflict over
the appointment, however, was merely the surface manifestation of
a deeper rift involving the direction of foreign policy, just as the
demands of Sunnites and Shiites for a more favorable sectarian
distribution of administrative posts reflected a more fundamental
discontent with the over-all power arrangements.**
Meanwhile, there had been an outbreak of sectarian conflict: A
series of incidents in 1953 and 1954 aroused tensions not felt in
Lebanon since the Mandate.** Sectarian tensions were also related
to the demands for closer economic unity with Syria, championed
by notables like Rashid Karami of Tripoli, and, as the British-
American design for the Middle East became apparent, sectarian
conflicts also prompted demands from some Sunnite quarters for a
broader and more militant unity against Western imperialism. As
political complications increased, President Chamoun’s ability to
carry out reforms declined. Subsequent evaluations of his reform
efforts agree that they produced more change than progress. A

=== PDF_PAGE 301 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 281
study published in L’Orient in October 1958 cited the two reform
experiments as “unfortunate” because they were too short to do
much good (one lasted six months, the other three).*¢ Experts in
public administration from the American University of Beirut
reached a similar conclusion, noting that there had been no sys-
tematic investigation of the administrative problem and that ask-
ing high bureaucrats to prepare reform proposals for their own de-
_ partments was not the most objective means of determining reform
priorities.*’ Furthermore, the basic problems—excessively formal-
ized procedures and a lack of well-trained and adequately paid civil
servants—had not been successfully attacked. Despite the failure
of these reforms, the demand for them from the younger notables
excluded from full power during the Khoury regime—incoherent as
it sometimes was—gave the President an opportunity to try to
extend his authority dramatically and to develop the bureaucracy
as his instrument of power. His nationalization of several important
utilities is a case in point. President Fuad Chehab had clearly
learned some political lessons from his predecessor when he under-
took his own administrative-reform program, which, as Chapter
8 suggests, further strengthened the Presidency.
External Pressures and Presidential Response
The great bulk of President Chamoun’s attention was devoted to
foreign affairs and their domestic consequences.** Part of this pre-
occupation derived from his own background as a diplomat in
London and New York, when he spoke for all the Arab states
during World War II and the Palestine crisis, and from a personal
orientation more cosmopolitan than that of either his predecessor
or his successor. Even before the series of regional crises that shook
Lebanon, the new President was already making visits to the Arab
heads of state. He accepted congratulations in Cairo, Riyadh,
Baghdad, and Amman, and he visited Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay
—with their large colonies of Lebanese immigrants—and Spain,
Italy, Greece, Turkey, and Iran.*” This auspicious beginning was
soon marred when the Arab states began to split into two hostile
blocs. The collapse of Colonel Adib Shishakly’s dictatorship in
Syria on February 25, 1954, which soon brought radicals like the
Baathists into influential positions there, demonstrated that the con-
flicting external interests in that time of turmoil in the Arab world
were a constant threat to every regime in the area. On April 2,
1954, Turkey and Pakistan signed an agreement that proved to be

=== PDF_PAGE 302 ===
282 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
the first step toward the Baghdad Pact, and on January 12, 1955,
the keystone of that pact was laid when Turkey and Iraq announced
a similar agreement and invited other states in the area to join in
the common defense. The United States and Great Britain seemed
to be having great success with their “Northern Tier” strategy for
containing the Soviet Union.°°
The reaction of the new military regime in Egypt to this latest
attempt to “organize the area” in defense of Western interests was
unmistakably hostile. Cairo launched a diplomatic and propaganda
campaign against the new alignment with the West. The Egyptian
government was especially harsh with Britain, which Cairo believed
was using this method to regain the influence it had signed away
only three months earlier in the Suez Evacuation Agreement.** Syria,
the scene of a tense struggle between pro-Iraq and leftist-nationalist
elements, slipped into the Egyptian orbit during February and
March, with the timely assistance of the Soviet Union, which had
promised arms and protection to both countries.°” The announce-
ment of the Soviet-Egyptian arms deal in September 1955 revealed
the weakness of the Northern Tier as a strategic concept and dealt
a severe blow to what British and American statesmen considered
their vital interests. On the regional scene, meanwhile, the increas-
ing savagery of Israeli raids against Egypt and Syria in the Gaza
Strip in February 1955 and hostile Turkish maneuvers against
Syria intensified the atmosphere of crisis.
The pressures on Lebanon were enormous. Because the Lebanese
population was split between commitment to the West and loyalty
to the Arab world, the intrusion of the Cold War into the area
rendered a mere continuation of the simple friendship policies of
the Khoury regime totally inadequate. President Chamoun’s attempt
to moderate Egyptian distaste for the Baghdad Pact, the West, and
alliances in general was unsuccessful.®** Chamoun does not men-
tion that he ever tried to dissuade Great Britain, Iraq, or Turkey
from making alliances; instead he takes a mildly approving stand:
Le Pacte de Bagdad, utile, peut-étre, 4 la défense des frontiéres
septentrionales de l’Irak, ne m/’avait inspiré aucun intérét particulier.
Je souhaitais cependant voir les Arabes sortir du cercle étroit dans
lequel ils continuaient de vouloir s’enfermer, et s’ouvrir 4 la coopération
politique, économique et militaire avec des Etats voisins tels que le
Pakistan, Iran et la Turquie.*4

=== PDF_PAGE 303 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 283
Conceivably, had President Chamoun elected to adhere to the kind
of strict nonalignment for which he was reproving President Nasser,
Lebanon might have avoided the Western entanglement from which
the crisis of 1958 emerged. His refusal to align Lebanon with the
Egyptian-Syrian-Saudi Arabian pact of March 2, 1955, which had
been created to counter the Turko-Iraqi treaty, made it appear that
_ Lebanon was indeed following a policy of impartiality. The Cairo
bloc, however, interpreted the Lebanese abstention as an act of
hostility, thus demonstrating the difficulties in convincing others
of one’s honorable intentions. President Chamoun followed this
apparent rebuff with a gesture that appeared to turn Lebanon pub-
licly toward the West, although—again—no formal commitments
were made.
At the beginning of April 1955, on the eve of the Bandung
Conference, President Chamoun and Prime Minister Sami Sulh paid
a visit to Turkey and concluded their stay by issuing a joint state-
ment that proclaimed the perfect harmony of the policies of the
two countries.” If the President was pursuing a policy of neutrality,
this statement certainly did not have a neutral tone in the opinion
of many Lebanese. Instead, it appeared to be a gesture of approval
for the Baghdad Pact; a slap at Syria, which was at the time in
serious conflict with Turkey; and a gesture of defiance to President
Nasser, whose diplomatic coup in the Soviet arms deal had cap-
tured the imagination of the entire Arab world. Four prominent
Muslim notables—Abdallah Yafi, Saeb Salam, Sabri Hamadeh,
and Ahmad al-Assaad—announced that they would boycott the
ceremonies marking the return of Chamoun and Sulh on a Turkish
yacht.** The suspicions of the pro-Cairo bloc in Lebanon that the
Chamoun regime was drifting toward the West could only have
been confirmed when Colonel Adnan Malki, the Syrian army’s most
important Baathist and pro-Nasser officer, was assassinated on
April 22 by a member of the P.P.S. An army purge drove Syrian
P.P.S. members to take refuge in Lebanon. Chamoun, who had
given the party a license in 1944, who had tolerated its reorgan-
izing in Lebanon, and who shared its distaste for the forces who
were against the Baghdad Pact, refused to grant the Syrian gov-
ernment’s demands for extradition. In May Sami Sulh declared in
Parliament, in reply to anti-Baghdad Pact speeches, that it would
be foolish for Lebanon to help isolate Iraq, a counterweight to
Egyptian pressures and an important trading partner.

=== PDF_PAGE 304 ===
284 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
President Chamoun’s reasons for not joining the Baghdad Pact
but instead opting for a pro-Western neutrality toward it are not
difficult to imagine. In terms of the logic of the Lebanese National
Pact, friendship with the West and part of the Arab world seemed
preferable to friendship with another part of the Arab world and
the Soviet bloc. Lebanon’s economic and social links with the
United States were numerous and important; Lebanese Christians
had a deep cultural and spiritual affinity for Europe; and President
Chamoun’s own dealings with the British had left him with a
frank admiration for their character as a people. Even more im-
portant, perhaps, was Chamoun’s growing realization that President
Nasser was on the verge of becoming too powerful, and therefore
too dangerous, in the area. Indeed, his hatred and fear of Nasser
are reminiscent of those of Sir Anthony Eden’s but perhaps more
understandable. As a professional diplomat, Chamoun could see
very clearly that Lebanon would ultimately have to orient its pol-
icies to harmonize with those of whatever “great power” emerged
in Arab regional politics, and he may have reasoned that Lebanon
could not long survive if that power were firmly anti-Western.
Although Chamoun was sensitive to the international implica-
tions of the Middle East power struggle, he cared less about the
limitations that the domestic situation places on the Lebanese
President’s conduct of foreign policy. Unlike Bechara al-Khoury,
who was patient and successful in dealing with his notables, Presi-
dent Chamoun had enormous difficulties in trying to establish a
solid power base. Because he had been put into power by a com-
plex coalition of notables and nascent radical groups that was
plagued with contradictions and rivalries, Chamoun hardly had the
opportunity to utilize the “natural” power structure of Lebanon.
A brief survey of cabinet politics in the year preceding the Suez
crisis will reveal some of the turmoil that President Chamoun faced.
The events of the first half of 1955 placed increasingly heavy
strains on the cabinet of Sami Sulh, the least pan-Arab in orienta-
tion of all the candidates for Prime Minister. The foreign situation
hindered the reform attempt of Chamoun and the Prime Minister,
and reform, as a political tactic, failed to divert parliamentary
attention from the struggles taking place outside Lebanese bound-
aries. Despite a partial cabinet reshuffle in July, which replaced
the staunch old independent, former President Alfred Naccache, as
Foreign Minister with the Cairo-oriented Hamid Frangieh, the
opposition was unsatisfied. The Baghdad Pact had become an issue

=== PDF_PAGE 305 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 285
with powerful emotional impact, and a simple cabinet reshuffle was
insufficient to counter it. Frangieh lost no time in bringing down
the cabinet by resigning early in September. Frangieh, it will be
recalled, had clashed with Chamoun nine years previously in Paris
during the troop-evacuation negotiations, when both were maneu-
vering for the Presidency; then in 1952 he had lost to Chamoun.
In that contest one of Chamoun’s advantages had been his influ-
ence and sympathies with the Arab world, whereas Frangieh’s
reputation at that time was only local in scope. Now the positions
were reversed: Frangich was the leading Maronite pro-Egyptian
spokesman, bidding perhaps for non-Christian support in the next
Presidential election; Chamoun, saddled with his own responsi-
bilities and a conflicting Western orientation, appeared to be play-
ing a more equivocal role.*” For a week after the resignations,
Chamoun backed Sami Sulh’s efforts to assemble another coalition,
but the opposition, more than usually united by the polarization
in the Arab world, insisted on a prime minister friendly to Cairo.
The two candidates that commanded the most support were Saeb
Salam of Beirut and Rashid Karami of Tripoli, both of whom were
outspoken sympathizers with the Cairo bloc, and Chamoun re-
portedly was not enthusiastic about either one. Finally Chamoun
designated Rashid Karami as the new Prime Minister.
Karami promptly declared that he would observe Hamid Fran-
gieh’s informal agreement with Nasser that stated that Lebanon was
against imperialist military pacts.°*° This announcement put the
Prime Minister somewhat out of step with the President. Chamoun,
however, had little room for maneuver because his strength vis-a-vis
the opposition was much less potent than the monopoly of power
that the Khoury machine had exercised at its height. The opposition
had a powerful and popular foreign issue, in addition to the inces-
sant patronage squabbles that increasingly discredited the Chamoun
regime. Since 1953 opponents of the regime had also been grouped in
a common front composed of such dignitaries as Hussein Oueini,
who enjoyed good relations with the government of Saudi Arabia;
the notables of the ex-Destour, now nominally reorganized as the
Democratic Party and quietly supported by the deposed President
from his villa at Kaslik; Ahmad al-Assaad, who particularly resented
President Chamoun’s support for a rival, Kazem Khalil; Kamal
Jumblat, leading the hard-core elements of the old S.N.F. and
the powerful P.S.P.; the Sunnite businessmen of the Hayat al-
Watania; and radical Arab nationalists in the various clubs around

=== PDF_PAGE 306 ===
286 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
the American University of Beirut and in the coastal towns. The
small Communist Party, too, supported the enemies of the Baghdad
Pact but could not play a major role because it was vigorously
persecuted by the government. President Chamoun’s support, on
the other hand, had not crystallized to the same extent, partly
because his “natural” allies in this situation were the conservative
Lebanese nationalists who included four potential rivals for the
Presidency. The two most direct competitors, Raymond Edde and
Pierre Gemayel (of the National Bloc and the Kataeb, respectively)
were unwilling to commit themselves fully to the President. The
new Maronite Patriarch, Butros-Boulos Meouchi, who succeeded
the conservative Antoun Arida, was still an unknown quantity, as
was the Commander of the Army, General Fuad Chehab, who had
already been head of state for a brief period. President Chamoun,
therefore, recruited several newcomers to the cabinet to provide a
counterweight to the Prime Minister. But the events of the fall and
winter—the Soviet-Egyptian arms agreement, the Egyptian-Syrian
military treaty, the Israeli assault on Syria at Lake Tiberias—only
increased the pressures on Lebanon to demonstrate its commitment.
Lebanon was offered membership in both the Iragi-Turk and the
Egyptian-Syrian military pacts. Although Prime Minister Karami
declared himself favorable to the latter,°® President Chamoun,
mindful of the other half of the nation, reportedly declared that
Lebanon would like to conclude a military pact with Syria, as long
as the interests of other Arab countries like Iraq were not jeop-
ardized by it.%°
The domestic ramifications of the Cold War did not work en-
tirely to Chamoun’s disadvantage. Negotiations with the Iraq Petro-
leum Company (I.P.C.) over transit fees gave the President an oppor-
tunity to show that Lebanon could be tough with a British firm;
and, because the Prime Minister’s constituency was Tripoli, where
the I.P.C. refinery is located, President Chamoun had a means for
controlling Karami, whose prestige was on the line in the negotia-
tions. Furthermore, the President’s followers in the cabinet provided
another check on the Prime Minister; and, when seven of them
resigned suddenly in January 1956 over a rumor that Karami was
about to redistribute administrative posts in favor of Muslims,
Presidential intervention was necessary to persuade them to stay
on. Through astute manipulation of his institutional powers, Cha-
moun had managed, through Karami, to make a gesture of support
for the Syrian-Saudi Arabian-Egyptian bloc without a firm com-

=== PDF_PAGE 307 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 287
mitment; at the same time he used the conservatives to keep
Karami in check, and finally on March 15 he let the cabinet fall
over one of many domestic problems."
President Chamoun’s exploitation of local particularisms is evi-
dent in his appointment of two of Karami’s Beirut rivals, Abdallah
Yafi and Saeb Salam, as Prime Minister and Minister of State,
_ Tespectively, in the next cabinet. Yafi’s cabinet caved in after only
two months and two weeks; its demise was precipitated by com-
plaints about the handling of reconstruction efforts in the wake of
an earthquake in March. The new cabinet differed little in com-
position from its predecessors, and the only notable casualty was
Emile Bustani, the Public Works and Planning Minister, who lost
his portfolio, although he kept his job as head of the Earthquake
Reconstruction Office. So far, President Chamoun had exploited
the parliamentary game to keep the domestic scene under control
while waiting for the regional crisis to go away. Instead, however,
it exploded in the chain reaction of events beginning with the
withdrawal of Western aid for the Aswan High Dam Project
(July 18, 1956), the nationalization of the Suez Canal (July 26),
and the Anglo-French-Israeli invasion of Egypt (October 29). A
crucial test for Lebanese policy and President Chamoun’s dip-
lomacy was at hand.
The situation would have been difficult even if relations between
Lebanon and Egypt were not strained. As we have seen, however,
the pro-Cairo elements found Chamoun’s foreign policy wanting,
even though it was formally correct. As for Chamoun, he was well
aware, by July 1956, that political disruptions were being produced
in Lebanon by Cairo: “La politique nassérienne de dislocation
nationale avait, depuis 1955, fait ses ravages dans les milieux
libanais. Sous le couvert de la lutte engagée contre le Pacte de
Bagdad, les dirigeants du Caire commengaient a encourager une
opposition systématique contre les pouvoirs établis. . . .” These
clear manifestations of Egyptian interference produced counterman-
ifestations in the form of demonstrations and petitions that affirmed
strict Lebanese sovereignty and deepened the growing crack in
national unity so carefully nurtured after independence. President
Chamoun quickly sent a message of support after the nationalization
of the Suez Canal, and made a public address in which he reiterated
that Lebanon stood behind what was clearly a legitimate exercise
of Egyptian sovereignty, even if the action did have a “brusque
aspect.” He also reassured Britain and France that Egypt knew

=== PDF_PAGE 308 ===
288 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
that its own interests lay in developing the Canal rather than in
restricting its use.“ This position, however, could hardly be called
one of enthusiastic approval, and the Egyptians were displeased.
Lebanese conservatives, however, were relieved at the restrained
character of the response. At the same time that the London Con-
ference was attempting to relieve the Suez crisis and the French,
British, and Israelis were planning their invasion, the Lebanese
cabinet was negotiating with the proprietors of two oil carriers, the
Trans-Arabian Pipeline and the Iraq Petroleum Company, whose
installations terminate at Saida and Tripoli respectively. For thir-
teen months the negotiations over revised transit fees had been
going on, and the two Lebanese negotiators, first Rashid Karami
and then Saeb Salam, had suffered a loss of prestige among their
nationalist followings because of their inability to obtain the com-
panies’ agreement to substantially higher fees. The companies had
not hesitated to use diplomatic pressures and threats to fire em-
ployees; the I.P.C. even threatened to move its entire operation to
Banyas in Syria. By late October the Yafi cabinet and Saeb Salam,
the special negotiator, were in considerable difficulty because of
their failure to strike a better bargain, and the. opposition press
was predicting the cabinet’s collapse when President Chamoun re-
turned from a visit to Iran, the newest adherent to the Baghdad
Pact.** Egypt’s nationalization of the Canal Company can only
have added both to the Arab nationalist zeal and to the discomfiture
of such notables as Yafi and Salam, whose own commitment and
popularity increasingly reflected Cairo’s brilliance.
Within hours of the Israeli invasion President Chamoun, antic-
ipating the position into which the opposition would try to force
him, called a conference of all Arab heads of state in Beirut to
decide on concerted action. Aside from the merits of such a con-
ference in terms of the crisis itself, the move was a shrewdly con-
ceived device for demonstrating Lebanon’s commitment to a cause
that could bridge the gap at least temporarily between Baghdad
and Cairo. It emphasized Lebanon’s useful role as a mediator,
without attachment to any particular Arab faction. This initiative
also served as an instrument for parrying criticism of Lebanon’s re-
luctance to break diplomatic relations with Britain and France.
Breaking diplomatic relations with the two countries most re-
sponsible for the Lebanese Republic’s existence was not a pleasant
move for President Chamoun to contemplate. Only a few months
earlier he had been quoted as saying: “Our time will come. The

=== PDF_PAGE 309 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 289
Russians and Egyptians are busy among the people. We will not
be able to resist without strong support from the West.” ® Yet he
well knew that such a gesture would be demanded, and it is reason-
able to suppose that he too was indignant at the tripartite collusion
and aggression. A source close to the President reports that Chamoun
actually took the initiative, while the bombs were falling, in urging
_ that all the Arab countries break relations at the very least.** Lebanon
would not even insist that the Arab states be unanimous in this
policy, although a unified approach would certainly be more effec-
tive. Chamoun ultimately went all the way with the pro-Cairo group,
leaving the Sunnite opposition with little to complain about. Cha-
moun’s escape clause lay in his reasonable proposal that Lebanon
could not act alone, vulnerable as it was to pressures from all sides.
Events moved so swiftly that Lebanon was luckily spared the neces-
sity of substantive action.
The Egyptian decision to withdraw in view of the overwhelming
superiority of the tripartite invasion force ruled out a military re-
sponse on the part of the other Arab states.“ For Lebanon the
immediate concern was defensive, and President Chamoun promptly
named General Fuad Chehab as military governor and imposed
martial law. By the time the conference of Arab heads of state
convened on November 13, the fighting was over, and the main
objective of the Arabs, President Chamoun now states, was then
to secure the removal of Israeli forces from Egyptian territory. This
end would not be served if all the Arab states broke off relations
with Britain and France.®* A resolution written by President Cha-
moun was unanimously adopted on November 15. It called upon
the Great Powers to implement the United Nations Security Coun-
cil resolution that called for a withdrawal of the Anglo-French-
Israeli forces and the separate consideration of the problems of the
Suez Canal and the recent aggression. The heads of state also
declared their support for the Algerian people in their struggle for
independence and saluted President Nasser and the Egyptian people
for their patriotic spirit.
The proposal for a joint unified Arab military command dis-
cussed at this conference established the precedent for the one set
up eight years later, though it had little effect on the resolution of
the crisis. As a stratagem in the Lebanese political context, the
proposal succeeded to some extent in taking the wind out of the
sails of the opposition, a process begun by Chamoun’s cool han-
dling of the question of breaking diplomatic relations. In the first

=== PDF_PAGE 310 ===
2900 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
days of the crisis Chamoun had been pressured by Salam and Yafi
to break relations. Their veiled threat to resign over that issue was
forgotten during the conference itself, according to Chamoun; but
the day after the conference ended, to Chamoun’s “great astonish-
ment,” they did resign, bringing down the entire government.”*
From the point of view of Yafi and Salam, however, President
Chamoun had hedged dishonorably during the crisis. They felt
that the least Lebanon might have done was to break relations
with England and France; and, when the government failed to do
so, they felt that it was no longer honorable to be associated with
the Chamoun regime. Resignation was the only choice.” Chamoun’s
agile maneuvering had made it difficult for his domestic enemies
to oppose him successfully over the Suez crisis. The fall of Yafi’s
cabinet could be interpreted as a victory for the regime, insofar as
it had adroitly weakened and shaken off the pro-Cairo faction with
a minimum of strain. On the other hand, the anti-Westerners could
claim that their withdrawal had weakened and embarrassed the
President and revealed his true, proimperialist colors. Chamoun
seems clearly to have been the short-run winner; he succeeded in
maintaining the political initiative throughout. As the editorialist for
L’Orient—no friend of the regime at that time—put it: “Le Chef
de lEtat est devenu tout le Législatif et tout ’Executif; et cela est
tellement vrai que l’on s’apergoit, chaque fois qu’il s’absente, que
tous les pouvoirs sont absents avec lui. . . .”
In the long run, victory went to the pro-Cairo bloc, and Cha-
moun’s surface brilliance as a politician dimmed. Camille Chamoun
did enlarge the scope and influence of the Presidency through his
initiatives and activism. His strong personality dominated local
politics and society. Up until the spring 1957 elections and under
extremely difficult circumstances, he made the Presidency more
than an umpire between opposing forces and gave it a degree of
dynamism. After that date, as Lebanon slid toward anarchy, his
initiatives threatened the traditional structures, and his dynamism
took on dictatorial overtones. Hindsight shows that he did not
succeed in building for the Presidency a solid, reliable, and univer-
salistic base of support. Consequently, like his predecessor, he spent
energies that might have been used more constructively for other
purposes to balance factions against one another and thus to stave off
the demands of a disorganized but growing opposition.

=== PDF_PAGE 311 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 291
NOTES
‘Among them are René Ajjiouri of L’Orient, Bassem al-Jisr of al-Jarida,
Ruchdi Maalouf of al-Safa, and Ghassan Tueni of al-Nahar.
2 The French, not unreasonably, assumed that they could always control the
selection of the President. They may therefore have regarded a powerful Pres-
| idency as a useful adjunct to their control over the vital administrative and
security agencies of the state.
3 American University of Beirut Department of Political Studies and Public
Administration, The Lebanese Constitution: A Reference Edition in English
Translation (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1960).
4 These three were Riad Sulh, who headed four governments consecutively
from December 1946 to February 1951; Sami Sulh, who headed three between
November 1956 and September 1958; and Rashid Karami, who headed two
consecutively during the period from September 1958 to May 1960 and another
one from October 1961 through February 1964, by far the longest-lived gov-
ernment since independence in 1943.
5 The fourth delegate was Camille Chamoun, then Lebanon’s minister in
London and—although a Destourian—a potential rival of Khoury for the
Presidency. Chamoun criticized the other three members of the mission for
bowing to French intransigence (he obviously hoped such criticism would dis-
credit President Khoury), and he was especially critical of Frangieh, another
rival for the Presidency. See Camille Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient
(Paris: Gallimard, 1963), pp. 175-9.
8 T’Orient, April 6, 1946. Bechara al-Khoury, Hagd’iq lubndniyyah [Leb-
anese Truths], Il (Beirut: Awraq lubnaniyyah, 1961), 233, reports that
Salem explained his resignation on the grounds that he knew Sami
Sulh’s government was sinking fast and did not want to go down with it.
Frangieh was unhappy because Chamoun, through General Spears’ contacts in
Lebanon, had been attacking him behind his back.
7 L’Orient, April 10, 1946; Khoury, op. cit., Il, 236-7.
8 Khoury, op. cit, II, 237. Among these leaders were Yussef Karam (Mar-
onite, North Lebanon), Muhammad Abboud (Sunnite, North Lebanon),
Omar Beyham (Sunnite, Beirut), Omar Daouk (Sunnite, Beirut), Habib Trad
(Greek Orthodox, Beirut), Nuhad Arslan (Druze, Mount Lebanon), Alfred
Naccache (Maronite, Beirut), and Kamal Jumblat (Druze, Mount Lebanon).
9 L’Orient, May 8, 1946.
10 Tbid., May 5, 1946.
11 Jbid., May 10, 1946. Khoury denies that he instigated Arslan’s speech.
Khoury, op. cit., II, 238.
12 T’Orient, May 16, 1946.
13 Khoury, op. cit., I, 239.
14 [bid., p. 240.
15 Karami’s program consisted of the following points: first, to modify the
constitution to make a stronger executive department; second, to redraw the
electoral districts along district lines, rather than by province, and to guarantee
free elections; third, to abolish the Ministry of Supply; fourth, to reorganize

=== PDF_PAGE 312 ===
292 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
the Surété Générale; fifth, to reduce the bureaucracy; sixth, to create an ac-
counting department and a civil-service board; seventh, to develop new educa-
tional programs; eighth, to invite foreign experts to study Lebanon’s financial
and agricultural problems; and, ninth, to change the administration of foreign
affairs. See L’Orient, May 22, 1946. By 1964, the second, third, fourth, sixth,
and eighth points had been accomplished.
16 Khoury, op. cit., Il, 240.
17 The followers of Sami Sulh were persuaded to participate in the same
Cabinet with Sabri Hamadeh; the Pharaon group was to participate with
Hamid Frangieh and Riad Sulh himself, Pharaon to relinquish his claim to the
Ministry of the Interior, Arslan and Jumblat to serve together, and the Shiites
to accept representation of only one portfolio. The second Maronite portfolio
finally went to Camille Chamoun because, as Chamoun suggests, his great
popularity in Mount Lebanon was essential for the Destour in the forthcoming
parliamentary elections. Camille Chamoun, op. cit., p. 198.
18“Why are we Riadists? Because, taking into account his virtues and his
defects—of the changes and risks that he represents—we find that Mr. Riad
Sulh is, in the new Lebanese equilibrium, at the center of our entire political
system. To what does he owe the privilege? Less perhaps to his own genius
or to the virtues of his character than to a combination of elements that have
acted and continue to act in his favor. His personality, his past, his domestic
position, his international relationships—in fact, the whole subtle play of im-
ponderables that crystallize around him—contribute to making him an in-
dispensable leader.” L’Orient, December 15, 1946.
19 This figure excludes the three short-lived cabinets following Sami Sulh’s
dramatic resignation on September 9, 1952. If they were included, the figure
would still be 7.8 months, well above the figure for the Chamoun era.
20 Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 78-9, describes his first political victory in the cam-
paign for the Chamber of Deputies in 1929 and the political ambition it
inspired.
21 According to Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 107-8, Emile Edde, who sensed de-
feat, proposed to withdraw his candidature if Khoury would withdraw his;
Edde suggested Chamoun’s name as one of three he would find acceptable.
Edde then withdrew his proposal because he believed that he had mustered
sufficient support from the Délégation-Générale to win. At a meeting of the
Destour, Khoury offered to leave Chamoun’s name in as the party’s candidate,
but Chamoun declined and promised Khoury his total support. In order to de-
ceive the French, however, Chamoun suggested that the party leave his name,
whereupon the French—who considered Chamoun the man of the British—
promptly withdrew their support from Edde in exchange for the Destour with-
drawing its support from Chamoun. Bechara al-Khoury thus became the com-
promise candidate. Khoury, op. cit., I, 257-65, tells a different story. He
claims that he had a clear majority several days before the election. Edde saw
that his rival was about to win and therefore declared that he (Edde) would
withdraw in favor of any of four men, not including Khoury, one of whom
was Chamoun. When informed by the British General Spears of this maneu-
ver, Khoury immediately called the bluff, declaring his readiness to forfeit in
favor of Chamoun if Edde would also withdraw. The French, fearing that

=== PDF_PAGE 313 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 293
Chamoun, “the man of the British,” might win as the compromise candidate,
were furious and threatened to tell General de Gaulle. Khoury believes that
Edde hoped that De Gaulle would annul or prevent the election. Finally, Edde
was prevailed upon not to retire in favor of Chamoun and Khoury’s candidacy
was reopened. Chamoun was visibly unhappy at the turn of events and would
not formally withdraw his own candidacy but pledged “his” votes to Khoury
instead.
* Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 124-5, writes that, through his quick thinking as
_ Minister of the Interior, he saved the regime from an attempted coup that re-
sulted from the election of the antigovernment candidate in a North Lebanon
by-election in April 1944. This effort prompted the French to send him away.
*8 Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 198-9. Chamoun writes that the irregularities of
the campaign provoked his break with President Khoury, which, however, did
not become public until the latter announced his intention to seek a second
term in May 1948. When Parliament actually re-elected the President on May
29, Chamoun resigned his post as Minister of Finance and formally entered
the opposition. Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 232-3.
24 Chamoun, op. cit., p. 243, writes that Frangieh was supported by the
clergy, financial circles, and several foreign interests (including, presumably,
France).
25 Daily Star (Beirut), September 30, 1952. See also Yusif El-Khalil, The
Socialist Parties in Syria and Lebanon (Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
American University of Beirut, 1962), p. 169. These demands were the more
extreme items of a ten-point program, and other sections were ultimately
implemented.
26 Daily Star, September 26 and 27, 1952.
27 Ibid., October 1, 1952.
28 Khaled Chehab had been a member of the 1922 Representative Council.
29 Daily Star, October 10, 1952. Sami Sulh, the Prime Minister whose res-
ignation precipitated the original crisis, voted against the government, whereas
two former friends of the Destour, Selim al-Khazen and Charles Helou (the
future President), abstained.
30 These decrees were intended to create new administrative cadres in all
ministries and departments. A new personnel law was issued; the judicial
system was revised; new accounting and auditing procedures were introduced;
and the Board of Economic Planning and Development was created. Further-
more, about 600 contract employees were fired. Ralph E. Crow and Adnan
Iskandar, “Administrative Reform in Lebanon, 1958-1959,” International
Review of Administrative Sciences, No. 3 (1961), pp. 293-307.
31 Chamoun, op. cit., p. 247. He does not claim that this codification actu-
ally eradicated the corruption that was rampant throughout the apparatus and
especially in the Ministry of Public Works.
32 [bid., p. 248.
33 Deputy Kabouli Zaouk complained about the “snail’s pace” of reforms.
Daily Star, October 24, 1952.
34 T’Orient, February 20, 1953.
35 Tbid., February 24, 1953.
36 Tbid., February 27, 1953.

=== PDF_PAGE 314 ===
294 > INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
87 Ibid., March 14, 1953. Simultaneously, a serious public dispute was going
on as the result of an “Islamic Congress” and the countermanifesto of
Christian notables, which had been the result of suggestions for closer eco-
nomic unity with Syria.
88 See, for example, ibid., April 22, 1953, for an account of a parliamentary
debate in which the old Destourian Emile Lahoud accused the government of
replacing tens of bureaucrats with hundreds and of mismanaging affairs in the
Ministry of Education. The Destourians sought without success to have the
decree laws annulled.
39 Its members were Joseph Chader of the Kataeb, Nassim Majdalani of
the Progressive Socialist Party, Takieddine Sulh of the National Appeal, and
Habib Rebeiz of the Hay’at al-Watania. Ibid., February 10, 1954.
40 Crow and Iskandar, op. cit., Pt. I.
41 T’Orient, May 28, 1955.
42 They were al-Nahar (rightist, pro-P.P.S.), al--Amal (the Kataeb journal),
al-Haydt (pro-British) , and al-Dyar (leftist).
43 T’Orient, July 9, 1954, commented: “La crise ministerielle la plus scan-
daleuse que le Liban ait jamais connue s’est ouverte hier. Une misérable
querelle autour de l’attribution d’une Ambassade a fini par emporter tout un
Gouvernement. .. .”
[‘“The most scandalous ministerial crisis that Lebanon has ever known began
yesterday. A wretched quarrel over the award of an ambassadorship ended by
overturning a whole government. . . .”]
44It was at this point that Pierre Gemayel of the Kataeb shot back at the
Muslims who were demanding more positions by stating: “Ne craignent-ils
pas qu’ils réclament, par example, l’égalité devant les charges destinées 4
alimenter la tresorerie de !’Etat? Il est en effet établi que les Chrétiens paient
un peu plus de quatre-vingt pour cent des impdots alors que le Musulmans
n’en acquittent que vingt pour cent.”
[““Aren’t they afraid that they will achieve, for example, equality in pay-
ments to feed the state treasury? It is an established fact that the Christians
pay a little more than 80 per cent of the taxes, whereas the Muslims con-
tribute only 20 per cent.”’]
Ibid., July 10, 1955.
45 For example, there were the flurry of excitement in March 1953 over the
Islamic Congress and its Christian counterpart and the “Chakar affair” of sum-
mer 1954, which concerned the distribution of a pamphlet insulting to the
Prophet Muhammad. See Chapter 3 of this book and L’Orient, March 14-20,
1953, and July 30—August 2, 1954.
46 T’Orient, October 18, 1958.
47 George Grassmuck and Kamal Salibi, Reformed Administration in Leb-
anon (Beirut: Catholic Press, 1964), pp. 18-9. Adnan Iskandar, Bureaucracy
in Lebanon (Beirut: American University, 1964), p. 136, comments that,
although Chamoun showed more concern for reform than his predecessor had,
his efforts were “superficial and unsuccessful” and “did not result in overall
significant changes in the administrative machinery.”
*8 Approximately 78 per cent of President Chamoun’s account of his regime

=== PDF_PAGE 315 ===
Presidential Power: The Struggle to Dominate + 295
(143 of 186 pages, not counting his description of the 1958 crisis), op. cit.,
is devoted to foreign affairs.
4° Ibid., pp. 254-60.
50 For a detailed analysis, see Charles D. Cremeans, The Arabs and the
World (New York: Praeger, 1963), pp. 137-48.
51 For a discussion of the Egyptian policy, see Erskine Childers, The Road
to Suez (London: MacGibbon & Kee, 1962), pp. 111 ff.
52 Patrick Seale, The Struggle for Syria (London: Oxford, 1965), pp. 220—
37. For a complete account, see also chaps. 15, 18. Syria became the first
Arab country to receive Soviet arms when it received a small shipment of
tanks in 1954. Ibid., pp. 232-4.
°3'The text of his message and of the Egyptian responses is in Chamoun,
op. cit., pp. 267-8.
54“The Baghdad Pact, useful perhaps in the defense of the northern borders
of Iraq, had not aroused in me any particular interest. I wanted, however, to
see the Arabs break out of the tight circle in which they still wanted to
confine themselves and to open themselves to political, economic, and mili-
tary cooperation with such neighboring states as Pakistan, Iran, and Turkey.”
Ibid., p. 266.
55 According to Chamoun, op. cit., p. 272, he had originally been invited
to Turkey in October 1954, when there had been “no question” of the Turko-
Iraqi treaty; the dictates of protocol fixed the precise date. He writes that the
idea of Lebanon’s joining the Baghdad Pact was brought up during the talks
but that he rejected it, saying that Lebanon could not cavalierly disregard
Arab public opinion (p. 276).
56 Arab World Opinion, April 6 and i2, 1955.
57 Chamoun, op. cit., p. 281, suggests that Frangieh’s behavior was moti-
vated by narrow political considerations and that there was no valid reason
for his resignation. Frangieh’s pretext—if it really was a pretext—was the
alleged irregular exemption of certain companies from their income taxes by
the previous Minister of Finance. L’Orient, September 5 and 7, 1955. Hamid
Frangieh was shortly afterward incapacitated by illness and withdrew from
politics.
58 T’Orient, September 8-21, 1955. Arab World Opinion, September 27,
1955.
59 T’Orient, October 20 and 28, 1955.
60 Arab World Opinion, January 3, 1956. The Syrian Defense Minister called
this outlook a “negative attitude.”
61 [’Orient, March 15 and 16, 1956. The particular issue was a proposal for
subsidizing private schools, which Karami and Minister of Finance Jamil
Mikkawi (both Sunnites) opposed, though the Minister of Education, a
Maronite, supported it.
62“The Nasserian policy of national dislocation had since 1955 created
disturbances in Lebanese quarters. Under cover of the struggle against the
Baghdad Pact, the Cairo leaders began to encourage a systematic opposition
to the established authorities. . . .” Chamoun, op. cit., p. 281. He charges that
the Egyptian embassy in Beirut was a center for subversion and propaganda

=== PDF_PAGE 316 ===
296 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
and that shops in certain sections of Beirut and in Saida and Tripoli had begun
to display portraits of President Nasser.
63 The text of this message is in Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 282-3.
64 T’Orient, October 24, 1956.
65 A Turkish Foreign Office official reported that Chamoun made this state-
ment after John Bagot Glubb’s dismissal in Jordan; quoted in Terence Robert-
son, Crisis: The Inside Story of the Suez Conspiracy (New York: Atheneum,
1965), pp. 44-S.
66 Emile Bustani, in al-Haydt, April 24, 1957, wrote that he was present
in council with the President, along with Ministers Yafi, Salam, and Selim
Lahoud, when Chamoun made this statement.
67 Seale, op. cit., p. 262, reports that the Egyptians restrained Syrian officers
from retaliating because they feared an Anglo-French invasion of Syria. The
British bombing, which began on the evening of October 31, persuaded the
Egyptian command to withdraw on all fronts. Childers, op. cit., pp. 292-3.
68 Chamoun, op. cit., pp. 302-5. Lebanon was the only Arab state in the
area that did not break relations with either country. Saudi Arabia and Syria
followed Egypt in breaking with both, whereas Iraq and Jordan broke only
with France.
69 Tbid., pp. 311-3.
70 The conference is not even mentioned in the studies of the Suez crisis by
Terence Robertson, op. cit.; Herman Finer, Dulles Over Suez (Chicago: Quad-
rangle, 1964); and Erskine Childers, op. cit.
71 Chamoun, op. cit., p. 314.
72 Interview with Abdallah Yafi, July 1, 1965. Yafi also recalls that he had
suggested the idea of a conference to Chamoun in the first place.
73 “The Chief of State has become the sole legislator and the entire executive;
that statement is so true that it seems, each time that he is away, that all power
has gone with him. . . .” L’Orient, June 17, 1956.
