=== PDF_PAGE 317 ===
CHAPTER: §
Presidential Power: The Attempt
to Modernize
The 1958 crisis, the watershed in the politics of independent
Lebanon, brought into the Presidency General Fuad Chehab,
Commander of the Army. President Chehab’s background and
personality, his attitude toward politics, his conception of the
Presidency, and, finally, his performance as President set him apart
from his two predecessors. President Chehab made it his mission,
once a degree of national reconciliation had been achieved, to
modernize the state. During the six years of the General’s rule the
Presidency grew in power and made substantial changes in the
traditional political practices; but, when it was all over, the ques-
tion remained whether or not Lebanon could ever break out of
its political stalemate.
The Chehab regime sought to modernize the Lebanese system
in three ways. First, Chehab attempted to circumvent traditional
politics without, however, disturbing “normal” political life; he
drew heavily on “new men” in the professions and the army. Sec-
ond, the President undertook the transformation of the state ad-
ministration on a larger scale than any attempted before and with
somewhat greater success. Third, there was a significant elabora-
tion of the prevailing political doctrine to encompass radical de-
mands for social justice without sacrificing the dogma of a “free
economy” and political sectarianism. For the first time the Presi-
dency became the source of a national political philosophy and
the term “Chehabism” entered the political lexicon." Chehabism—
Lebanon’s equivalent of the New Deal—was basically a moderate
welfare ideology tailored to the Lebanese situation.
297

=== PDF_PAGE 318 ===
298 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
A NEw POotitTIcAL STYLE
Under normal circumstances the Lebanese system would never have
drawn a man of General Chehab’s background or temperament to
the Presidency. Politics in Lebanon is a game that primarily
attracts cosmopolitan lawyers and bankers. General Chehab, on
the other hand, belonged to a profession held in low esteem by
the establishment. Military service, as one of the notables put it, is
the last refuge for those who cannot succeed in business or the
respectable professions. As a fighting machine the Lebanese army
is virtually untested, unable to boast of either decisive victories or
heroic defeats.? It therefore commands little prestige among the
middle or upper classes. Furthermore, General Chehab did not
have the personality of a typical successful Lebanese politician.
Whereas the prototype politician, as described earlier, is a sophis-
ticated political broker, extravagant in manner and quite at home
in the labyrinth of Lebanese politics, the General was reserved,
straightforward, and somewhat disdainful of the political game.®
To his admirers he was also distinguished from most of the polliti-
cians for his honesty, his methodical leadership, and his selfless
devotion to the interests of Lebanon. Lebanese radicals of all per-
suasions were drawn to General Chehab because he appeared to
share with them a wish for order and clarity in political life, what-
ever the substantive goals might be.
President Chehab was born in 1903 in the Kisrwan district of
Mount Lebanon, and entered the military service when he was
nineteen years old.* He belonged to one of Lebanon’s most famous
families and was distantly related to Amir Bashir III who ruled
briefly after the Egyptian withdrawal in 1840. He attended village
schools and the Collége des Fréres Maristes in Jounieh. In 1921
he was admitted to the Damascus Military Academy and left it two
years later as a sublieutenant in the Mixed Troops in the service
of the Mandate. Chehab became a lieutenant in 1929 and a captain
in 1930 and was then sent to France for further military training.
Between 1931 and 1937 he commanded the garrison at Rachaya.
After another year in France he returned to Lebanon at the be-
ginning of World War II. After Lebanon fell under British-Gaullist
control, Chehab was charged with organizing detachments of the
Troupes Spéciales du Levant for service in Libya, Tunisia, Italy,

=== PDF_PAGE 319 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 299
and France. Already a lieutenant-colonel in 1944, he was made a
general in 1945 and Commander in Chief of the Troupes Spéciales
in Lebanon. When the Lebanese army was created in 1946, Chehab
was its first commander. One of his main interests as commander
was developing a modern, scientifically oriented, and professional
organization. He inspired unusual respect and devotion; he reportedly
insisted on passing on each promotion personally and knew a great
many of his men by name. The General was more successful in
modernizing the army than the politicians were in modernizing their
political organizations. General Chehab’s “nonpolitical” charac-
teristics, far from constituting a barrier to personal power, were an
asset that brought him more widespread popularity than he could
have enjoyed by belonging to one—or indeed all—of Lebanon’s
political parties.
The General’s rise as a politician was a function of Lebanon’s
political divisions. Specifically, it resulted from the cyclical colli-
sions between radical and establishment elements, with the outcome
of each conflict dependent on how, or whether or not, Chehab used
the coercive powers of the state. A series of emergencies between
1948 and 1958 placed Presidents Khoury and Chamoun in a posi-
tion in which they had to call for Chehab’s assistance. In most
developed states the power of the head of state over the commander
of the army is clear, and for the military man to disobey a civilian
command is treason; but in Lebanon the Constitution is ambiguous
on the nature of this relationship.® The constitutional vagueness only
reflects the real situation: The army, formally a nonsectarian or-
ganization, was devoted to its founder and commander, and the
commander saw his primary obligation as the preserver of the state
before all other commitments. The Presidents requested rather than
commanded his cooperation. On a number of occasions during
both regimes General Chehab did cooperate, notably during the
abortive P.P.S. coup of 1949 and the Suez crisis of 1956; but, as in-
dicated in Chapter 3, his refusal to aid the Presidents in 1952 and
1958 greatly altered the course of events and made him a powerful
political figure. The turmoil of the 1958 civil war and the American
intervention in Lebanon brought Chehab to the Presidency. His
conspicuous lack of involvement in the deepening crisis, at the same
time others were discrediting themselves through partisan participa-
tion, made him the only figure who could possibly stabilize the
system. General Chehab did not have to plot a coup or proclaim a
revolution to achieve power. It was unnecessary: The opportunity

=== PDF_PAGE 320 ===
300 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
was thrust upon him. On July 31, 1958 the reluctant General was
elected President by a vote of forty-eight to seven.‘
As long as General Chehab was exercising negative influence, he
was undisturbed by the normal political activity; but, when he was
elected President, he was required to alter the scope, base, and style
of his power. Chehab was compelled even more than his predeces-
sors to dominate the traditional political system. In the first place,
the traditional system had been torn apart by the 1958 crisis, par-
ticularly the events of September and October, and the establishment
seemed incapable of restoring national unity by itself. In the second
place, Chehab needed to fulfill the expectations of his supporters
among the insurgents that he would reform the state and adhere to
a more pro-Arab interpretation of the National Pact than had Presi-
dent Chamoun. For these reasons it would no longer be possible
simply to ignore the politicians; Chehab set about trying to control
them. His strategy was to build on the alliance of the rural, largely
non-Christian landowners and progressive forces that had supported
the insurgents and to temper it with a considerable injection of
younger, non-political types—professional men, who would serve
the purposes of promoting nonpartisanship and of improving the
administration. They would also owe their loyalty directly to the
President.
Chehab’s first cabinet, formed September 24, 1958, was com-
posed largely of moderates, progressives, and technicians, but it left
the Chamoun partisans completely excluded. This exclusion proved
to be a mistake, and fighting, precipitated by a nasty incident (the
kidnaping and apparent murder of a Christian journalist of the
Kataeb’s party newspaper), broke out again, and the Kataeb manned
the barricades. On October 15, in an extremely tense atmosphere,
Chehab formed a new cabinet that made no pretenses to normality.
Two important (if reluctant) supporters of the Chamoun govern-
ment, Raymond Edde and Pierre Gemayel, both Maronite, were
paired with two Sunnite insurgent leaders, Hussein Oueini and
Rashid Karami, and Karami again was Prime Minister. This time,
however, the President insisted that the cabinet be given wide emer-
gency powers; and for a year he used them to restore normal order
in the country. When Raymond Edde left this government in October
1959, as the result of his conflict with the Army and Pierre
Gemayel, the cabinet was enlarged to resemble very closly the
cabinet of September 1958; all the five new entrants represented
moderate-to-progressive tendencies.* The next cabinet was deliber-

=== PDF_PAGE 321 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 301
ately made even more neutral, because its job was to preside over
the 1960 parliamentary elections. To this point all of Chehab’s
cabinets had deviated from the norm in the political game either be-
cause of their high proportion of neutrals and new faces or because
of the problems surrounding the emergency. By both means Chehab
had circumvented the traditional role of both the Parliament and
cabinet.
The 1960 election, however, marked a turning point in this tactic.
Pro-Chehab, pro-insurgent deputies overwhelmingly outnumbered
the little band of Chamounians and Edde supporters that had been
returned from Mount Lebanon. With this considerable institutional
support, President Chehab evidently decided the normalization of
political life was then in order. His first postelection cabinet, headed
by Saeb Salam, contained no less than eighteen ministers, allowing
even greater scope for personal, regional, and sectarian rivalries to
flourish harmlessly. As if to make sure of his hold, President Chehab,
without warning, submitted his resignation on July 20, 1960, and
declared that his mission of national reconstruction was over.® The
consternation in political circles and throughout the state generally
was so acute that Chehab was persuaded by an imploring Parlia-
ment to retract his resignation, which he did a few hours later. The
crisis gave the President a powerful vote of confidence. It demon-
strated not only his apparent indispensability but also the relative
impotence of the other institutions of government.
During the remainder of his term, Chehab enjoyed a secure politi-
cal position based on the cooperation of the following elements:
the Kataeb, which found a meeting ground with the other groups in
a common desire for moderate social improvements and which also
wanted power; the Armenian Tashnaq; the Assaad bloc in South
Lebanon; the Jumblat-P.S.P. bloc in the Chouf and parts of Beirut
and the Biga; the Destour; the Sunnite notables of Beirut, Tripoli,
and Saida (although their support was not uniform); and various
“giants” of outlying regions, like Sleiman Frangieh (brother of
Chamoun’s rival), René Moawad, Fuad Ghusn, and Sabri Hamadeh.
These groups combined to make up a majority bloc and were con-
sistently opposed by the much smaller group of opponents of the
regime. It was by no means a disciplined bloc, however, and Chehab
had to deal with the same traditional rivalries that had troubled
Khoury and Chamoun. Chehab’s position was much stronger, how-
ever, and he ruled undisturbed, even though the notables had re-
sumed their rivalries. The regime was not much affected by the

=== PDF_PAGE 322 ===
302 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
quarrels between Saeb Salam, Sabri Hamadeh, and Kamel al-Assaad.
The fights between Camille Chamoun’s new National Liberal Party
and Jumblat’s P.S.P. or the personal rivalry between Pierre Gemayel
and Raymond Edde were not real problems for the regime. The en-
larged cabinets of the Chehab regime gave the President and his
Prime Minister greater maneuverability and simultaneously reduced
the cabinet-wrecking capacities of the numerous factions. Cabinets
averaged 10 men during the Chehab regime, compared with 8.8
men under Chamoun and 6.9 men under Khoury. Chehab govern-
ments also lasted longer, averaging 10.3 months. Rashid Karami was
Prime Minister most often, alternating with Saeb Salam, compared
with the greater variety of Sunnites employed by Chamoun and
Khoury. Government under Chehab operated more smoothly than
it had since the days of Riad Sulh.
There were, of course, problems. The only Chehab cabinet not to
win overwhelming parliamentary approval was Saeb Salam’s second
cabinet of May 20, 1961, when Salam cut his former government
from eighteen members to eight, which displeased a great many
former insurgents close to his rival, Rashid Karami.'° Karami’s
triumph over Salam came at the end of October 1961, when the
Prime Minister found his cabinet disintegrating around him. In a
classic maneuver, Kamal Jumblat, then a minister in Salam’s cabinet,
quarreled with Salam over a high bureaucratic appointment and
launched a personal attack against Salam himself; in a bill of accusa-
tions strongly reminiscent of his assault on Khoury and Riad Sulh
in 1947, he condemned the Salam government for everything from
encouraging tobacco smuggling to refusing to recognize Communist
China."’ By resigning in “principle” yet remaining in office to tor-
ment the government, Jumblat for a time accomplished the re-
markable feat of being both inside and outside the government
simultaneously. When Salam insisted that President Chehab remove
Jumblat, the President failed to use his superior position as umpire
and did nothing, and another cabinet fell of its own weight. Karami,
whose relations with the President were better than Salam’s were,
was also, according to some accounts, more willing to use his posi-
tion to help the President bring about his reform program. According
to others, Salam’s frequent complaints about army intervention in
administrative appointments were the decisive factor in the fall of
his cabinet. On the whole, then, President Chehab restored the old
political game to a semblance of its earlier “health,” and, although
he had to pay the usual price in influence peddling and inefficiency,

=== PDF_PAGE 323 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 303
it gave him the stability he wanted and freed his energy for the task
of national development.
The major political innovation of the Chehab regime was the
creation of a personal political organization quite unconnected with
the traditional political system. A group of men, who owed their
loyalty entirely to the President, acted as his agents within the
bureaucracy and carried on the President’s campaign to create an
orderly and capable administration. Prominent within this top circle
of advisers was the President’s Chief of Cabinet, Elias Sarkis
(Maronite); Pére Louis-Joseph Lebret, a French Jesuit priest; and
Intendant Jean Lay, a particularly close associate. Lay, an engineer
and former French colonel in the Mandate service, quickly gained a
reputation as the regime’s éminence grise. His presence at meetings of
the Council of Ministers and constant contacts with high officials
irritated more than one non-Chehabist politician.1? Among the other
civilians in this privileged circle were the technical adviser in the
President’s office, Chafic Muharram (Sunnite), and Georges Haimari,
- head of the Customs Council and adviser to several Presidents. The
President also recruited a number of younger, “progressive” intel-
lectuals and professionals for middle-rank administrative jobs and the
new agencies that he created; many of these men were brought in from
outside the administration on a contract basis and at higher salaries
than ordinary officials received. They, too, had direct loyalty to the
- President. These appointments seem to have both injected greater
skill and initiative into the new administrative ventures and as-
sured more direct presidential control.
The complexion of the President’s inner group was predominantly
military, however. A select group of officers, some of them trained
in the United States and all extremely loyal to General Chehab as a
person, were reportedly closer to him than were most of the poli-
ticians.’* Beside this top echelon there was also a group of younger
officers, captains and majors in their thirties, who were getting a
taste of politics for the first time. These officers had come mostly
from the lower middle class and had gone through the deuxiéme
partie of the baccalauréat program (at age nineteen), after which
they had attended the Army Staff College for four years. Some then
went on to universities to study law and the liberal arts or enrolled
at military schools in France and the United States. According to one
well-placed Lebanese observer, these younger officers had no con-
crete political affiliations, but they shared in general a certain con-
tempt for the politicians, “aristocrats born with silver spoons in their

=== PDF_PAGE 324 ===
304 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
mouths,” and a vague desire for “social justice.” This attitude put
them somewhat left of center in Lebanese terms but well to the
right of Marxist or communist beliefs.
Whereas the army served an increasingly important political func-
tion as a deterrent to radicals and troublemakers, it also became a
new instrument for carrying out the President’s program. President
Khoury had directed his political energies to manipulating the tradi-
tional system; President Chamoun had tried to replace it; but Presi-
dent Chehab, after he had enlarged the traditional arena a bit,
proceeded to ignore it and to build up an organization that would
exert a systematic and controlling influence in the bureaucracy, so
that he could go on about the business of modernizing the country
economically, socially, and politically. Had Chehab been moved by
the examples of Charles de Gaulle and Gamal Abdel Nasser? The
similarities between him and these two other officers in politics are
striking. Chehab shared with them an attitude of distaste for civilian
politicians, which he acquired during his military training in France.
As De Gaulle was repelled by the incompetence of French politicians
during the 1930s and Nasser was indignant at the decadence of
Egyptian politics under King Farouk, so too Chehab may have felt
a certain contempt for the corruption and lack of direction in Leba-
non’s political life. As De Gaulle and Nasser seem to have served
as obvious models for General Chehab, so they may also have
exerted direct political influence on the Lebanese General; during
his regime he successfully cultivated warm, though discreet, rela-
tions with Paris and Cairo."
The extent of army intervention in politics is very difficult to
judge, especially because the press was forbidden to print news about
activities of the military, other than official releases, on security
grounds.’” Well-placed and responsible individuals, however, spoke
of officers applying pressure in the appointment of provincial gov-
ernors and directors-general of ministries and benefiting from the
allocation of certain public-works contracts. In this connection, there
was some indication of intervention in the activities of the Finance
Ministry over budgetary matters. A respected opposition editor
claimed that the standard of living of officers had increased spectac-
ularly under the Chehab regime. Army officers allegedly received
preferential treatment when they applied for loans from the govern-
ment-sponsored Agriculture and Industrial Credit Bank. Opponents
of the regime claimed that good connections with the army would
help one to obtain a license, to settle a dispute, or to obtain a govern-

=== PDF_PAGE 325 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize * 305
ment job. Identical allegations had been raised against the two pre-
ceding regimes and even against the regimes of the Mandate era.
The political activities of the officers, however, were not te-
stricted to the administrative field. Although the army applied only
selective pressures during the 1960 elections, its presence was every-
where, and the Lebanese voter—long sensitive to signs that indicated
which candidates the regime preferred—could draw his own con-
clusions. This degree of official pressure was certainly not unusual
for Lebanon. After the attempted coup by the P.P.S. at the end of
1961—during which several high officers close to Chehab, including
Lieutenant-Colonel Yussef Shmayet, Lieutenant-Colonel Abdel-
Kader Chehab (commander of the Beirut garrison), Lieutenant-
Colonel Toufic Jalbout, and Major Francois Genadry were success-
fully kidnaped—the army reacted with Draconian efficiency. At
least 6,000 people were arrested, the passports of six prominent
political figures—including former President Chamoun—were re-
voked, and in the public trial that followed the names of Chamoun
_ and Raymond Edde were mentioned in connection with the plot,
though no formal allegations were made. Thereafter, the army’s sur-
veillance of the political scene greatly increased. Enemies of the
regime found themselves the objects of intimidations that included
slashings, shootings, lawsuits, and business pressures. Editors became
aware that the regime was extremely sensitive to criticism. The 1964
- elections for the Parliament that would elect (or re-elect) the Presi-
dent were marked by several important instances of military inter-
ference, even more than in 1960. In Akkar, a region of tough feudal
rivalries, the army reportedly backed Bashir Osman against Sleiman
al-Ali. Four years earlier the army had been neutral, and al-Ali had
beaten Osman, but in the intervening period Osman had allegedly
curried favor with the army.*® In Baalbek-Hermel there were obvious
intimations that Sabri Hamadeh was not in favor; in Beirut Takied-
dine Sulh was. In Jbeil, where Raymond Edde, the army’s chief
civilian opponent, thought he was assured of victory, certain elements
of the army exerted pressure, and he lost by a narrow margin. In the
Chouf President Chamoun was at first reported to have won, but a
delayed vote count indicated that he had lost after a campaign
marked by some official harassment. In Tripoli the army was out in
force on election day, which may have reminded the voters that
Rashid Karami was the President’s favorite Prime Minister. Whether
or not these selective interventions were crucial in eliminating from
Parliament two potential presidential rivals and in ensuring the

=== PDF_PAGE 326 ===
306 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
success of key regime supporters is hard to say, but the results and
the rumors were enough to convince many people that there might
be some truth in Raymond Edde’s well-publicized charges of army
interference.
In the maneuvering that preceded the Presidential elections, the
army scarcely hid its support for Chehab’s re-election; on July 20,
the fourth anniversary of the President’s attempted resignation, the
Defense Ministry was strung with lights like a Christmas tree, and the
streets were festooned with banners, proclaiming homage to Chehab,
which had been placed there at the request of the army. Some
friends of the regime thought that the officers had overplayed their
hand by appearing so obviously to interfere against Chehab’s op-
ponents and by identifying so openly with the Chehabist bloc in
Parliament; these moves alarmed such important actors in the tra-
ditional politics as the Maronite Patriarch, certain influential bankers,
and the Shiite notables in South Lebanon. There was not even com-
plete agreement within the army on this degree of involvement, and
at least one important faction, headed by a Christian officer, opposed
interference in Edde’s campaign.
The officers’ active participation in politics was deeply resented
by traditional politicians of all political tendencies. One of them
remarked that, although scandal and corruption had certainly been
present during previous regimes, at least it had been possible at that
time to protest publicly and use the established institutions—imper-
fect as they were—to bring about changes; but, when the military
prohibited free expression, it smothered one of the most important
self-correcting devices in the Lebanese system. To notables who
held this opinion, the failure of the campaign in 1964 to amend
the Constitution and renew President Chehab’s term saved liberal
democracy in Lebanon. The other side argued that political mod-
ernization required the stronger leadership that Chehab and the
military provided at the top.
Apologists for the regime pointed out, fairly enough, that inter-
vention by the President’s group in administrative appointments and
decisions has been the norm rather than the exception. The fact that
some of President Chehab’s agents were officers was not inherently
sinister: Like his predecessors, he was only using his trusted friends
and associates, and they happened to be mainly military men. The
politicians were unhappy, according to the Chehabists, because the
officers had deprived them of patronage. The Chehabists also em-
phasize that the attempted coup by the P.P.S. had been a traumatic

=== PDF_PAGE 327 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 307
aA eex perience for the military; the kidnapings of officers had sharply
reduced the tolerance and restraint that the military had long ex-
ercised in politics. Is it not understandable, they asked, that the
officers, who are only human, should have showed their feelings? 1”
Furthermore, the officer corps shared General Chehab’s concern for
modernizing the state without delay and had become impatient with
what they considered the petty inefficiency of the normal political
Process. A high Defense Ministry official put the case bluntly. We
don’t think much of the politicians, he said, and the army only puts
up with their petty squabbling because it is patient. Military men,
therefore, were reluctant to accept the refusal of Chehab to press for
another term but hoped that his successor would carry on his policies.
General Chehab certainly wished to preserve liberal democracy
in Lebanon, but the divisions reopened by the 1958 crisis, the Arab
“cold war” between “radical” and “conservative” regimes, and the
growing domestic demands for “social justice” placed him in a
difficult position. If he relied entirely on the traditional system of
conflict resolution, he might have been confronted with another
popular crisis. In the face of an expanding politicized population,
which was laced through with radical groups, weak government
would invite discontent and rebellion, and rebellion would lead to
foreign intervention and sectarian strife as it had in 1958. On the
other hand, to establish the political base for strong government
required introducing new elements into the political scene; and the
officer corps, although it had as many sectarian divisions as any
other public institution, was, by virtue of its unifying mission for
Lebanon and its disciplined professionalism, the least divided by
sectarian suspicion and the best organized group for rational action.
More important, the army was the only group that the new President
could trust. Military influence within the government, however,
clashed with Lebanon’s traditional laissez-faire politics. General
Chehab restrained his officers through his self-effacing example, and
he felt that the traditional balancing function of the parliamentary
institutions should not be impaired. There is no doubt, however, that
he severely damaged the prestige of these institutions on several
occasions. Nonetheless, the Lebanese situation placed restraints on
General Chehab. Direct military government may have been possible,
but its consequences might have been severely destabilizing. By
attempting to focus national attention on development and social
justice, Chehab tried to divert Lebanese from their traditional political
parochialisms and to find a common goal above sectarian and na-

=== PDF_PAGE 328 ===
308 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
tionalistic conflict. Although he was far from successful, the fact
that Chehab could maintain a coalition that included the Kataeb,
the Destour, the Tripoli bloc, Kamal Jumblat, Kamel al-Assaad, and
a number of the “nonpolitical” professionals is a significant testament —
to his prowess as a politician. Chehab provided the impetus for a
moderate social-democratic grouping, which, if ever realized, could
provide his successors with a stable and dynamic structure for com-
bating Lebanon’s political troubles.
THE EXPANSION OF GOVERNMENT
A drastic expansion of government accompanied the Chehab regime’s
effort to rationalize the political process. Tables 25 through 28
provide an overview of this expansion. They show that, although
considerable growth took place during the two preceding regimes,
there was a marked acceleration in administrative development after
General Chehab became President. As these figures reflect, the 1958
crisis appeared as a grim warning that the burdens on the Lebanese
political system were exceeding its capabilities; hence the heavy em-
phasis of the Chehab regime to promote social justice through na-
tional development.
As Table 25 indicates, governmental expenditures as a percentage
TABLE 25
EXPENDITURES IN THE ORDINARY BUDGET AS A PERCENTAGE
OF Gross NATIONAL PRODUCT, SELECTED YEARS,
1950-1964
Year 1950 1956 1958 1961 “1964
Percentage 8.1 11A Y LS Ta ee oe
Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités de Développe-
ment du Liban, I (Beirut: 1960-1961), 80; and Republic of Lebanon Ministry of
Finance, Fadlakat mashri‘ mawazanat ‘am 1966 [Résumé of the 1966 Budget
Project] (Beirut: 1965), p. 7.
of national product have risen steadily. The increase was especially
sharp during the years of the Chehab regime. By the early 1960s
this percentage had reached the level of several Western countries.
When the trend of expenditures in the budget itself is examined
(Table 26), ordinary budget expenditures in 1964 are found to be

=== PDF_PAGE 329 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 309
TABLE 26
EXPENDITURES IN THE ORDINARY BUDGET, 1944-1966
Actual Expenditure
Year (Lebanese pounds)
Khoury regime 1944 27,666,573
1945 35,920,893
1946 $1,993,915
1947 60,722,427
1948 70,076,517
1949 83,401,986
1950 84,521,928
1951 90,051,120
1952 88,509,851
Chamoun regime 1953 96,308,968
1954 111,182,939
1955 132,376,965
1956 161,348,024
1957 192,466,137
1958 181,622,338
Chehab regime 1959 198,571,296
1960 243,087,753
1961 269,260,306
1962 415,278,121
1963 430,284,750
1964 473,016,000*
Helou regime 1965 514,790,000*
1966 585,300,000*
* Totals approved by Parliament.
Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Finance, Qata‘ al-hisab, 1951-1963 [Closed
Accounts] (Beirut: 1964); Sleiman Gemayel, Evolution du Budget Libanais (Beirut:
1962), p. 70; Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Finance, Fadlakat mashriii mawazanat
‘am 1966 [Résumé of the 1966 Budget Project] (Beirut: 1965), p. 175.
approximately seventeen times those in 1944. The development of
specific services over time and as a proportion of the total ordinary
budget is roughly portrayed by Table 27. Public works, defense, and
education had the highest priority throughout a period characterized
by generally high growth in government services. Public works took
an especially high percentage of the budget in the later period. They
also share the highest growth rates during the early 1950s. In the
later period public works are matched by the percentages for propa-

=== PDF_PAGE 330 ===
310 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
a s p j u a o l a d ‘ a s p a s O u y P 9 6 I - L S 6 1 9 v 7 O 8 7 C S P 8 L I S L Y v O C 9 6 1 c 6 l S 7 z 0 ' T ‘ s o u e u t J o ‘ ( 1 9 6 1 ‘ s g e
«
V 9 6 I L O N
a
s v j U a I 4 1 a g j o j 0 L f o a 9 C I € ' 0 € 6 7 E N G 8 6 G o l c i c 0 c
A n j s
t u r w o u e g
k e y y
: i n t e g )
Y
‘ L S 6 I 4 9 6 1 9 I O ‘ E L Y T S v ‘ 6 s I e e e v l € O L ‘ E l C O L T S 9 6 ° t r v 7 9 ° O L S L v ‘ s t 8 L 9 ° 6
e T
J o s q n
d
u o
u n g a T f
o
‘ o
I yw
S 6 1 ‘ S H U N
L
a s p j u a o 1 a d ‘ a s p a d I u y L S 6 I - I S 6 1 V I C L V E e s o c 8 9 1 9 L T L I ? S O T p u e ‘ ( 7 9 6 1 a s j v o s i g
L Z w a
v
I G N a d X Y L a o
d n g A U V N I
G U O
G a L O A T
A S d O N o
a s v j u a o 1 a g
a s p j U u a o
d a d
[ p 1 0 f o
L S 6 1
[ v i o
f o
[S61
a
9 9 4 7 6
TS0
O T T
O 7 7 I Z
L
€°
o
90L
l
6
G O L
o R Its
G
c' s
L
6r
I
6 ¢ €
0 8 9 ° L
L
7
'
i
8
s
s
S
l
v i
9 L 9 ° T
‘ oPu
6 0
o
1
S Z O ' T Z
C
I S 6 ' T T u
e l
€ ° 0 7
$ 9 0 ° 6 €
6
9 8 6 ° L I
61
G Y
0 v 0 ' 8
v
6 S 3 ' V
's
S
v v 6
o u o u
‘ ( O 0 ' I $ A l a y e u n x
o i d d e s j e n b o
¢ y % J )
s p u n o d
e s o u e q e y ] j o
“ L S 6 I ‘ I S 6 T * I M I
l e q ) s r u n o s 2 p
p a s o j D
‘ g o u e u t
g J o A n s t y ,
a y y ‘ y o p e u y ‘s
e l e y ‘ T L “ d
‘ ( S 9 6 T
: n m i e g )
j o a l o r g J a s p
s l u v d W o d a i n j i p u a d x q K 1 0 8 a j D ) y a s p n g q [ e 1 0 . L u o n e o n p y S y I O M o I q n g q y e s y o t q n d s r e y e [ e l o o s p u e J o q e y ] J O L I O } U T a s u a j o q s I n y N o L s y U O n e U L I O J U T s u o r [ i u u l ore s o m n s t y x u o w e g e y T j o s q n d o y n g 9 9 6 ] a y s f o a u i n s o y " ¢ - z ‘ d d

=== PDF_PAGE 331 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 311
ganda and labor and social affairs as the regime embarks on mod-
Tee e
ernization.
Outside the ordinary budget there has been an important increase
im governmental direction of special services—mostly in the areas of
water supply and electricity—since 1951. In that year the Beirut
Water Company was nationalized, and in 1954 the government took
over the functions of the privately owned Beirut Electricity and
‘Tramway Company and established the Common Electricity and
Transport Service. It also initiated the Litani River development
project. These agencies are the most important in a series of new
autonomous authorities whose financial growth is shown in Table
28.
TABLE 28
EXPENDITURES OF AUTONOMOUS AUTHORITIES, SELECTED
YEARS, 1957—1964
Year Expenditure*
57 69,912,000
1959 79,311,193
1960 148,274,360
1962 189,968,240
1964 225,145,000
* In Lebanese pounds.
Raja S. Himadeh, The Fiscal System of Lebanon (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1961),
p. 21; Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Finance, Résumé of the 1966 Budget
Project (Beirut: 1965), pp. 90, 153.
In terms of employed manpower, development is also substantial.
The 1933 budget went to support a government of only 3,600
bureaucrats, of whom 1,600 were in the police. The Department of
Public Works employed 80, the Department of Public Instruction
391, and the Department of Public Health and Assistance 47.1% The
number of civil servants in 1947, not counting police, was 5,421, in
1953 it was 14,800, and in 1958 a budget study showed that the
civil service included 17,562 employees.'? The Ministry of Public
Works then numbered 1,088 and the Ministry of Education 5,370.
The Chehab administrative reform of 1959 reportedly raised this
figure by 1,700 positions.*® Officials are extremely reluctant to
divulge more recent figures on government employment, but one
source outside the government placed the 1966 total at 26,000, and

=== PDF_PAGE 332 ===
312 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
an authoritative source within the government gave a figure of
30,000. Two experts surveying the development of government in
1955 stated that “government and its administration are Lebanon’s
biggest business and perhaps her largest responsibility of the time.” S
They could hardly have anticipated just how big it would become in
the following decade.
The military forces too have increased markedly, both in numbers
and in fighting capacity. According to President Chamoun, the army
numbered about 6,000 men in 1952, and by 1956-1957 its ranks
included more than 10,000 men.*? During the regime of General
Chehab it grew to 15,000, and some of its rather antique equipment
was modernized. The Lebanese army, incessantly denigrated by many
Lebanese, is probably a better fighting force than they think. Un-
like neighboring forces, it is a professional, not a conscript, army.
Furthermore, its officer corps is well trained and has never been
diminished in numbers or effectiveness by political purges, as have
the officer corps of the Syrian and Jordanian armies, for example.
Whether or not the Chehab presidency succeeded in rationalizing
the political process is questionable, but nobody doubts that it chal-
lenged prevailing conceptions of the role of the state itself. After
1958 Lebanon gave up the guidance of Herbert Spencer for that of
John Maynard Keynes and tried to lay the foundations for a sig-
nificant transformation of the state economic system. Under Chehab’s
tutelage this effort had three aspects. It involved, first of all, an
attempt to engage in comprehensive planning and thus to give the
state an active role in social and economic development. Administra-
tive reform was the second aspect of the Chehab program, and al-
though it was not new in conception, it was innovative in applica-
tion. The third feature was the creation and implementation of new
programs, ranging from reforestation to social security. President
Chehab described his goals in the following words:
Animé de cet esprit nouveau, celui d’organiser les rapports sociaux
sur des assises modernes, lEtat s’efforce de résoudre les problémes
sociaux dune maniére qui permette de renforcer chez les Libanais
la croyance, déja enracinée en eux, qu’un pays qui veut se moderniser
et développer sa vie économique et sociale peut y parvenir par la
voie démocratique.?*
The origins of this “new spirit” lie in the turmoil of the 1958
crisis. One of the President’s associates declared that the new regime
was inspired by the following simple analysis: The fundamental

=== PDF_PAGE 333 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize » 313
causes of the 1958 crisis were socioeconomic, arising from the
crystallizing discontent in Lebanon’s own underdeveloped areas. Ac-
cording to this analysis, only a spark is necessary to set off an ex-
Plosion that could eventually take on religious coloration and lead to
the ruin of the state. In 1958 there had been several sparks; there
could be more at any time. The first priority of the state, therefore,
‘must be not only the maintenance of short-term stability or simply
the promotion of economic prosperity; it must also be the promo-
tion of basic equality among the different regions and sects. Muslims,
in particular, must be persuaded that they too have a stake in
Lebanon; a Lebanese patriotism (liwa’ lil-watan) must be created.
Giving non-Christians a greater share of administrative posts and
substantially improving basic services, the Chehabists argued, will
encourage Muslim loyalty. This equalitarian, materialistic approach
was bred by the concern of the Chehab modernists for the fragility
of Lebanon’s “negative consensus.”
Planning
The basic thrust of the Chehab regime’s three programs was not
new to Lebanon, but their magnitude far exceeded previous efforts,
especially in the planning programs. A Planning Council had been
established during the Chamoun regime in 1953, and a Ministry of
General Planning was created in 1954. Despite its ministerial
status, planning remained a small-scale operation until 1962. The
budget for the Ministry’s first year amounted to only L£236,000
(about $78,000), and four years later it was only L£367,000
($122,000); this figure was about enough to pay for the salaries of
eighteen civil servants, a small statistical office, liaison operations
with other ministries, a planning council, and a control agency over-
seeing fuel companies, mines, public lands, fairs, and exhibitions.
The Chehab decree laws of 1959 stripped the Ministry of several
of these functions and provided for its reorganization. In May 1962
the Ministry was reorganized again. By that time it possessed a
staff of 209 civil servants. The Ministry's budget in 1964 was
L£2,409,000 ($803,00)0. *
President Chehab was not content, however, to rely solely upon
the Planning Ministry for guidance. In March 1959 the President
arranged with Pére Louis-Joseph Lebret, then Director of the French
Centre Nationale de Recherche Scientifique and head of the Institut
International de Recherches et de Formation en vue de Développe-
ment Intégral et Harmonisé (IRFED), to bring to Lebanon a re-

=== PDF_PAGE 334 ===
314 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
search team that would study the country’s development problems
and make fundamental recommendations. The IRFED mission,
which included eleven French experts and thirty-two Lebanese
technicians, was nominally established under the auspices of the
Planning Ministry, but it had direct responsibility to the Presidency
as well. Several of the programs of the Chehab regime, which will
be described later, were inspired directly by the IRFED mission. The
acid reaction to IRFED among the President’s opponents demon-
strates that the implementation of “développement intégral et
harmonisé” paid political dividends as well; critics charged that
IRFED was a state within a state and that it was attempting to im-
pose “Vatican socialism” on the free economy.
The IRFED diagnosis discusses many of the socioeconomic prob-
lems that have been described in Chapter 3, and its suggestions
form the core of the Chehabist approach to Lebanon’s weaknesses.
Its recommendations are a model of Gallic rationality and compre-
hensiveness. The first phase of IRFED’s operations was a systematic
inventory of the needs and resources of the country encompassed
in a two-volume report published in 1961.” The second phase was
the creation of a long-term plan (le plan perspectif) and a middle-
range, four-to-six-year plan.** The directors of IRFED then sub-
divided their subject chronologically and functionally. They argued
that there are four phases of national planning: elaboration, in which
the necessary plans and subplans are drawn up and specialists hired;
decision, in which the number of acceptable projects and subplans is
reduced and choices are made between various alternatives for
chosen ends; execution, in which the ministries and regional au-
thorities put into effect the plans selected during the second phase;
and, finally, the phase of successive adjustments, in which the execu-
tion of the plans is adapted to unforeseen changes and unforeseeable
situations. After the completion of the initial survey, the IRFED
group began to make subplans that would eventually harmonize with
one another in conformity with le plan perspectif in the following
areas: hydraulic engineering, roads, transport, ports, airports, energy,
agriculture, industrial and handicraft orientation, education (in-
cluding culture and sports), applied research, and tourism. These
plans in turn would be subdivided regionally by province and
municipality and generally into the areas of integrated financing,
zoning, and administration at the national level.
Whereas long-term planning and investment in large projects long
antedated the arrival of IRFED on the Lebanese administrative

=== PDF_PAGE 335 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 315
>iao rs e scene, these earlier efforts were considerably more restricted in scale
than development under Chehab. A Development Works Fund had
been established in 1944 and had spent more than L£200,646,000
by 1958.°7 Much of this money had been allocated for the construc-
tion of the Beirut International Airport and for water projects. In
1954 ten-year development plans for water and electricity were
initiated. It was not until 1962, however, that general planning was
given the prominent position it continues to enjoy. In that year,
five-year plans in irrigation, programs to provide drinking water,
electricity, roads (e xcluding Beirut and Tripoli), and antiquities were
initiated, totaling about L£205 million.’ In July 1963 IRFED
took a giant step by proposing a L£3 billion five-year plan for
1964-1968, a figure about 1.5 times the country’s total Gross Na-
tional Product in 1963. The plan required Lebanon to obtain a
L£300 million loan from Kuwait.” The advisers of the Chehab
regime obviously hoped that the President could offset some of the
disadvantages of the Lebanese political system by programing long-
term development. Although these activities may have been a far
cry from Arab socialism, they were not a very close approximation
of Lebanese J/aissez-faire.
More Administrative Reform
That such rational planning could be implemented in Lebanon’s free-
wheeling economic and political-milieu struck some Anglo-Saxon ob-
servers as unlikely. To carry out the plans depended not only on
neutralizing the political field—which President Chehab accom-
plished over the opposition of many notables—but also and even
more on building an administrative apparatus capable of such a
formidable task. Past experiences did not augur well for such an
undertaking: The Khoury regime had fallen largely because of ad-
ministrative corruption, and the reform efforts of President Chamoun
had aroused a storm of opposition. It seemed almost beyond the
government’s power to sustain the growing number of essential serv-
ices, much less to undertake new ones. On the eve of General
Chehab’s inauguration, a respected editor wrote:
Il est impossible de dire qui est chargé de surveiller la nourriture pré-
sentée dans un grand hotel de la montagne: la municipalité locale? le
Commissariat du Tourisme? le Service de la Répression des Fraudes?
ou le Ministre de la Santé? Quand on ouvre une nouvelle artére dans la
capitale, on n’a pas fini de l’asphalter que le Service des Eaux, ceux des

=== PDF_PAGE 336 ===
316 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
égouts, de l’électricité, et du téléphone viennent chacun a son tour éventre
la chaussée pour y installer leurs cables ou leurs tuyaux. . . .*°
Within three months after he took office, President Chehab had
asked for and received sweeping reform powers for a six-month
period, in order to carry out his administrative reforms. Racing the
clock, the regime issued 162 decrees on June 3, 1959, which called
for the overhauling of virtually every branch of the bureaucracy.”
The decrees were designed to facilitate decentralization, define duties
and responsibilities more precisely, cut red tape in working pro-
cedures, improve central control as a means to reduce corruption,
and revise recruitment procedures to improve the quality of civil
servants.*? A Central Committee for Administrative Reform, com-
posed of high civil servants and private individuals, was established
to supervise the implementation of the decree laws. It was given
three months to accomplish this Herculean task; two years later,
entangled in politics, it was not finished.
The earliest evaluations of the reforms were highly critical. The
newspaper L’Orient, a strong supporter of the regime, remarked:
“, . . [JJamais les services publiques n’ont été plus désorganisés et
les formalités plus lentes que depuis le promulgation des fameux
décret-lois de 1959; jamais les agents de l’état n’ont pris moins
dinitiatives.” °* Two experts in public administration criticized the
reform because it had failed to decentralize thoroughly; because it
had been, like its predecessors, carried out as a “bootstrap” opera-
tion without sufficient expert guidance; because it had been rushed
FIGURE 5. Administrative Reform.

=== PDF_PAGE 337 ===
iStle
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 317
through too quickly; and because it had failed to reduce the ex-
ta e
cessive emphasis on red tape.*t Another specialist wrote in 1961
that the low standards of public services (health and education)
were not offset by the additional expenditures being made in those
fields: “The standard of public social services is so low that money
grants equivalent to what is spent on these services can probably
increase efficiency more than the health and education services
offered by the Government can do.” *° With the perspective of four
years, two other experts made the following assessment:
In practice the operation could not be and was not as well coordinated
as in theory and in plan. The reform proposals which did come to
the central committee were often the products of pressure rather than
of measured, coordinated thinking; and they may have embodied the
earlier convictions, if not the interests, of those who were already
ensconced in the public service.*®
Friends of the regime appeared to share this view; the Minister of
State for Administrative Reform thought that the reform had been
rather effective at the higher levels but had failed to have much im-
pact at the lower levels of administration, where the general public
has most of its contact with the bureaucracy.*” Another prominent
defender of the regime thought that the reform was only beginning
to have an effect when President Chehab’s term expired. The final
judgment, however, was made in effect by President Chehab’s suc-
cessor, Charles Helou; following the traditional custom, he began
an administrative reform of his own.
AG
Via e;
oad (Poe
e ve kee Ves ae

=== PDF_PAGE 338 ===
318 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Despite its failings in terms of its ambitious goals, the reform
still made several advances. It laid the basis for combating the
single most serious weakness in the apparatus: the poor quality of
personnel. A Civil Service Council was established to rationalize the
recruitment process; although it ran into predictable difficulties with
rival and older governmental agencies and with politicians who saw
in it a threat to their patronage powers, it has made substantial
progress since it began operating late in 1959.** A related outgrowth
of the reforms was the National Institute of Public Administration,
established by a French expert to provide administrative training in
conjunction with the Civil Service Council. Nevertheless, private
business continues to draw off the top talent, and government posts—
although they offer considerable security—still do not pay well.
The reform also extended central control over programs and
allocations. The effectiveness of the Central Inspection Agency was
augmented by giving preaudit powers to its Court of Accounts and
adding an organization for research and guidance to the Agency.
Although these modifications conflicted somewhat with the goals of
decentralization and cutting red tape, they were useful in making
possible better supervision of the tremendous expansion of adminis-
trative activities. The reform, in addition, provided for a significant
enlargement of the powers of the Prime Minister. The Court of
Accounts, the Central Inspection Agency, and the Civil Service
Council were placed under his direct jurisdiction, and the budget
for the Prime Minister’s office climbed between 1960 and 1964
from L£3,493,000 to L£9,618,000. Furthermore, when Rashid
Karami was Prime Minister—a position he held during most of the
Chehab regime—he not only enjoyed a close working relationship
with a powerful President, but he also took the Finance Ministry
portfolio for himself, thus greatly enhancing his influence.*® The
Prime Minister’s new power was probably beneficial, in that it im-
proved executive efficiency and gave the restive Muslim community
an additional increment in the sectarian balance of power. Limited
as these reforms may have been, Lebanese administration did make
a significant step forward in efficiency.
There was also a shift in the sectarian composition of the
bureaucracy that gave non-Christians near parity with Christians in
top positions. One Chehabist remarked that, although every modern
person would like to be rid of sectarianism in administration for
good, it is impossible at the moment. The regime did the next best

=== PDF_PAGE 339 ===
sb Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 319
thing: It adopted a fifty-fifty rule for the distribution of high posts.
Although it is difficult to show accurately the extent of this erosion
of Christian predominance, the figures in Table 29 suggest that the
non-Christians have made relative gains. Except for provincial ad-
ministrator, all categories show a perceptible decline in the per-
centage of Christians that averages about 9 per cent.*°
New Programs
The Chehab regime scored its most spectacular political and ad-
ministrative gains in actual implementation of programs. Much of
the popular appeal of Chehabism was due to the expansion of
water, electrical, and road service to areas that had previously been
deprived of these benefits. The year 1962 was the turning point in
this transformation: In that year public expenditures rose from
L£269 million to L£415 million; the ordinary budget ran a deficit
for the first time; and government expenditures as a percentage of
national income jumped from 14.5 per cent to 22.2 per cent. If
the expenditures in both the ordinary budget and the budgets of the
independent agencies are included, the percentage of the national
income was 33.6, a figure that compares favorably with those in
such developed nations as Belgium, Japan, Italy, Denmark, Canada,
and the United States.*t Total ordinary budget outlays in 1964, the
last year of the Chehab regime, were nearly 2.5 times greater than
the biggest budget of the Chamoun regime; and expenditures in
the independent authorities (which mainly supervised electricity and
water development) had risen by 322 per cent.*? Between 1945
and 1962, one authority has argued, the Lebanese state actually
manufactured a mild deflationary condition, without knowing it, by
following almost mercantilist financial policies.** The cost of sound-
money policies has been unbalanced economic development: Services
of various kinds account for two-thirds of Lebanese Gross National
Product in the 1960s; agriculture and industry share the other third.
After 1962 President Chehab and his cautious successor Charles
Helou sought to alleviate long-standing deficiencies in the socio-
economic infrastructure.
Their efforts took several forms. The enormous expansion in
public-works projects was the most noticeable. The budget of the
Ministry of Public Works increased 4.5 times between 1957 and
1965, far exceeding the budget of the other major ministries both

=== PDF_PAGE 340 ===
320 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
a s v j u a r 1 a g U D 1 q S I A Y D 09 Ss 09 09 L9 vs v9 Os c o € s - I V = O V - e z i j e i a u e s Z 9 6 I S U L
N V I L p u v i y ( P 1 O L s t O r s s S i € I l 9 7 v e 8 ‘ j e j s o j } 0 1 g = y S n o r 1 0 g
6
8 “ 4 ‘ ( L r e l
S I W H O
N
= P I O 9 L I CG Tt I E9 L v E l E l 8 E " J O 1 g [ n y o s n ‘ o [ e
U
O N
d 4 L
‘
o o
o q
A e
O N e
N
m w o
r
e
I I 1 c A o u N
N O I L V U L S HS I t Le Or 67 u e W O o Y = j e ] y } 3 n q ‘ g s u e s I d w y : s t e q ) y n n e
6 7 A T A V L $ I N I N G Y N I S L O A S A O A O N V W I V A N V I L S I Y H O 1PI0.L O V 4 0 4 d C e O D i o ) «WN 2) ( I T 44 AN + c S Sik ( v 9 4 0 0 0 9 I v l c 0 I c 8 (Zé l “ x o p o y u Q Y e u I H D = O O ‘ Q 0 N I W Q W U D = O O
‘
e z n i g q = qd ‘ e l l y s = H S ‘ e y u u n g = § “ ‘ o
l
y e o y s n e j s A u e u l a j q e s r e d u i o o A j i r e s s e s o u j o u o e u o g i T u p s a n b y y o g s u o y n j y s u y s a y o p u o y e l d g ‘ A s s e q u i g u e o t o u r y o y } A q p o p r a o i d s y e l o y y o y W o u
r
2 0 0 ipa X y e 1 9 u e s - s 1 0 1 9 9 1 1 q J o s p e o y p u r + 9 7 6 1 S O O T A I O S C 9 6 1 J o s i o j e I s I U I M I p Y 9 r 6 l $ ] } O L N S I p 7 9 6 1 a y e s i s e u Y s t H 9 r 6 l s u o n t s o d C 9 6 1 o n e w o j d i p y s t H 9 r 6 l s u o r t s o d C 9 6 1 9 r 6 l [ R I 0 . L C 9 6 1 o w u o r w W = W : s u o n e r A c i q q y x o y y e D U e r u e u l s a j d u r e s 7 9 6 ] PUue O P 6 I P U L + *suOT} ‘ x O p o y y I Q U R I U S U I V § W o y ie e s o i n s y 9 7 6 1 U L u I e A o s J o jsI] & W o z ore s o m n s y

=== PDF_PAGE 341 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize +» 321
in absolute size and relative gains. Massive road-building efforts and
comprehensive projects for redevelopment in the Beirut area were
undertaken.“ The Kataeb, in particular, benefited from this policy
because its chief, Pierre Gemayel, had control of this choice port-
folio, as did the builders, contractors, and property owners affected by
these grand projects. One of the most important elements of the
Public Works Ministry was the engineering section headed by the
_ city planner Michel Ecochard. Ecochard’s group, like several others
scattered throughout the bureaucracy, enjoyed good access to the
development-minded President. The various water and electricity
agencies also expanded during the Chehab and Helou regimes (most
of them had only been brought under public control during the
Chamoun presidency). In 1964, of the seventy-one independent au-
thorities, the most important financially were the Common Elec-
tricity and Transport Authority, the National Litani [River] Au-
thority, the National Reconstruction Authority, the State Railroad,
the Office of Social Development, and the Beirut Water Authority.*°
A French-owned company until the government took it over in
1954, the Electricity Authority's budget quadrupled between the
last “normal” year of the Chamoun regime and the last year of
the Chehab regime.
Other executive agencies appeared. A special word should be
said about Lebanon’s U.S. $77 million hydroelectric and irrigation
project, the Litani River scheme. The National Litani Authority,
established in August 1954 and financed initially with a U.S. $27
million loan from the World Bank, began in 1957 to build a com-
plex of dams, tunnels, and generating stations that are expected to
supply 124 million kilowatt hours of electricity annually. In 1964
the nearly completed project supplied one-seventh the electric power
of Beirut—89,332,000 kilowatt hours.** Perhaps more important
in terms of the Chehabist policy of rural development was its capacity
to irrigate 40,000 new hectares ( approximately 98,800 acres) in
poverty-stricken South Lebanon. The National Reconstruction Au-
thority was established after the severe earthquake of March 1956
to rebuild the devastated areas; it is financed by special surtaxes and
continues to be used for these emergencies. The Office of Social
Development became the specialized institution for distributing public
assistance through private charities and sends teams of social workers
into the more remote rural areas. This agency was originally linked
with the IRFED mission and loosely associated with the Ministry of
Labor and Social Affairs.

=== PDF_PAGE 342 ===
322 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Education
The regime tried to strengthen the inadequate public education
facilities both quantitatively and qualitatively. The percentage of
students in government schools showed a moderate increase: Only
31 per cent of the primary and secondary students in 1959 attended
government schools, but by 1964 42 per cent attended these
schools. At the secondary level alone, the government schools’ share
of the enrollment rose from 23 per cent in 1955-1956 to 34 per
cent in 1963-1964. A five-year plan for education, which envisaged
the construction of 620 new schools, mostly in rural areas, was
launched in 1965. Committees reviewed the curriculum, which had
been modeled after the French system, in response to pressures to
diversify the program above the elementary level and thus to give
more scope for technical and vocational courses. Some educators
urged more and better training in the social sciences.
Although the Chehab regime was aware of the importance of
education, its reform efforts were hindered by familiar political
problems. The inefficiency of the government made improvement
painfully slow. Competition from the private schools, with their better
salaries and working conditions, drew off the better teachers. At the
same time the private schools, responding to the law of supply and
demand, raised their fees, further intensifying the need for ex-
panded government education. Despite a basic curriculum for all
schools, public and private, there was no doubt that the educational
system remained an important perpetuator of sectarian distinctions.
Curriculum reform in history teaching, for example, is particularly
difficult because Muslim educators stress the necessity of emphasiz-
ing the Arab cultural heritage, whereas Catholic educators are re-
luctant to reduce their concentration on Western European civiliza-
tion.
One of the most imaginative innovations of the Chehab regime
was the Green Plan, a program for land reclamation and develop-
ment designed to help curb the migration to the cities and improve
the techniques of agricultural production by providing heavy equip-
ment and easy loans to farmers.*" Established in 1963, the organiza-
tion began work in July 1964 with a ten-year budget of L£70
million and an administrative staff of seventy. Like other Chehab
development projects the Green Plan was not under the direct
supervision of any ministry but was only loosely associated with
the Agriculture Ministry. Its loans and credits are channeled through

=== PDF_PAGE 343 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 323
the government-sponsored Agricultural and Industrial Credit Bank.
By the end of its first working year the Green Plan reported that
it had completed twelve small reclamation projects, mostly in South
Lebanon, and that twenty-eight more were in progress. A drive
through South Lebanon revealed bulldozers from the Green Plan
terracing and clearing stony, barren plots, but it also impressed ob-
_ Servers with the magnitude of the task: The rural stagnation was
obvious. If Beirut is a lure, the uncertainties of the border situation,
the tightness of the market for rural products, the intractability of
the land, and the limited resources of even a socially conscious gov-
ernment are factors that also explain the depressed nature of this
area.
The Chehab regime also established a central bank when the
currency-issuing functions of the Banque de Syrie et du Liban ex-
pired in 1964. The new bank typified the changing position of the
state in economic life. Until the establishment of the central bank,
the state was deprived of an essential instrument of monetary policy.
As one student of the subject wrote: “The private banks do their
business the way they like and the government, except in periods of
crisis, does not interfere in the banking activities and thus under
normal conditions the government’s influence is almost negligible.” *°
In theory the new central bank could extend easy credit and increase
the volume of money in hard times and contract the money supply
during periods of inflation, policies that were not compatible with
the wishes of private banking interests. In fact, however, it did not
exercise such initiatives at first, partly because of limited rediscount-
ing capacity and partly because it lacked important information
about the state of the economy. In its first annual report, the gov-
ernor of the central bank, Philippe Taqla, an old Destourian and a
banker himself, complained of the inadequacy of statistics, par-
ticularly those concerning labor costs, revenues in general, and the
changing cost of living. Such information, he remarked, is indis-
pensable for both intelligent state and intelligent private action.”
During the 1966 Intra Bank crisis, the Central Bank remained con-
spicuously aloof. Although another important piece of the machinery
of a modern state had been added, its operational capabilities re-
mained uncertain.
Probably the most ambitious of all the projects was the social-
security scheme. Article 54 of the Labor Law of 1946—the most
significant legislation of the Khoury regime—explicitly envisaged
a social-security code.” The gestation period for this project had

=== PDF_PAGE 344 ===
324 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
been leisurely. Attempts to pass relevant legislation in 1952 and
in 1956 had never gotten past the drafting stage. Scarcely two
months after General Chehab took office in 1958, however, the
Council of Ministers formed a committee to design a social-security
project.*' A draft was drawn up on the basis of studies made in the
Ministries of Finance and Social Affairs; during 1959 and 1960
this draft was circulated among various business, political, and
labor groups for comment: The Kataeb was particularly active in
its elaboration at this stage. Late in 1962 an amended draft law
was approved by the Council of Ministers and sent to the Parliament
for study. There it remained until autumn of the following year.
On September 26, 1963, the President promulgated the law by
decree, and on May 1, 1965, after delays caused by sectarian dis-
putes over the appointment of a director, the first stage of the project
went into effect. The system was intended, when fully operational,
to provide for medical and maternity insurance, insurance for job-
related accidents and sickness, a system of family allowances, and
end-of-service indemnities. The main instrument of the scheme,
the Social Security Treasury, took its place among the ranks of
special organizations added to the state by the regime. The Social
Security Treasury was backed by the government for 25 per cent
of its funds, with the remainder supplied by employers and em-
ployees, and it was designed to be financially and administratively
independent, although it was placed under the surveillance of the
Ministry of Social Affairs.°”
Not one of the notables or politicians interviewed by this writer
doubted that Lebanon needs a social-security system badly; most,
however, expressed doubts that the state is capable of administering
such a complex program. Some experts were critical of the program
itself, pointing out the inadequate statistical information, the ex-
cessive burdens placed on small employers and their employees, and
the insufficient governmental participation.>* There were also the
deeper problems of political rectitude and popular attitudes: Could
the Social Security Treasury guarantee that retirement pensions and
medical assistance would be given? Was the government capable of
operating a social-security system without corruption or scandal?
Could employers and employees be persuaded or compelled to sub-
scribe part of their wages and income to a social-security program?
A history of administrative scandal and inefficiency has not given
the Lebanese people great confidence in the abilities of their govern-
ment. On the other hand, proponents of the project argued that

=== PDF_PAGE 345 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 325
there is no other choice for Lebanon; even a scheme poorly run at
first is preferable to none at all. They also argued that the scale of
the operation in comparison to those operating reasonably well else-
where was very small, and that the Lebanese do not lack talent and the
ability to learn. For Lebanon, social security, they argued, is espe-
cially advantageous because of its redistributive and integrative
_ possibilities.**
LEBANON’S POLITICAL FUTURE: CAPABILITIES VERSUS LOADS
Chehab’s term expired in the summer of 1964 with a great many
projects started but few completed. Chehabisme had restored the
prosperous pre-1958 status quo but had failed, despite a determined
effort, to resolve the Lebanese political dilemma. To General Che-
hab’s successor, Charles Helou, fell the task of walking the tight-
rope.
In some ways President Helou was eminently qualified to carry
on the attempt to modernize. He was, for example, well prepared
for handling the sectarian problem, because he had been Ambassa-
dor to the Vatican from 1947 to 1949 and during that time he had
helped to persuade the Pope to deny diplomatic recognition to Israel.
In 1958 his leadership of the Third Force, which was in moderate
opposition to the Chamoun regime, entitled him to the blessings of
the Muslim communities and to acceptance by the radical insurgents.
As a journalist, a tourism director, and a protégé of the banker
Michel Chiha, Helou possessed the connections and skill in dealing
with people that are particularly helpful for the President in Leba-
non. Most important, he had no powerful enemies.
Not only was Helou well qualified, but his election was, for Leba-
non, a model of orderly succession. For the first time since inde-
pendence the Presidency changed hands without the accompaniment
of a general strike or foreign intervention. Renewal of the President’s
term was again an issue, but this time the crisis revolved around the
President’s refusal to accept a second term. The election of Charles
Helou was also remarkable because the Parliament showed a modi-
cum of autonomy vis-a-vis the President when a thirty-three-man
bloc of deputies from South Lebanon deserted the majority that
wanted to re-elect Chehab. Contrary to the expectations of some
observers, the army did not intervene to name a successor to General
Chehab, nor did the embassies of the United States and the United

=== PDF_PAGE 346 ===
326 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Arab Republic play an active role in the selection process. Although
his enemies doubted it until the last moment, General Chehab proved
that he did not harbor further political ambitions and that he did
not regard himself or any other chosen officer as indispensable. A
major and expected obstruction to restoring civilian rule thus failed
to materialize. The new President began his tenure with a vigor
that undoubtedly surprised some of his supporters. He lost little time
in taking up questions of municipal reform, public housing, taxation,
and administrative housecleaning.
Despite his qualifications and intentions, President Helou was to
a large extent the prisoner of a situation that imposed narrow limits
on executive power. Any assessment of the Presidency or of the Re-
public’s future requires an analysis of this situation. The situation
may be viewed in terms of the capabilities of a political system to
handle the loads placed upon it. President Helou’s success or failure,
as well as the long-range survival or disappearance of Lebanon itself,
is largely a function of these capabilities and loads.
The new President came to office with the disadvantage that
afflicts all Lebanese Presidents: the lack of a permanent, organized
power base. Charles Helou’s position in this respect was weaker
than that of his predecessors because he lacked even their rudi-
mentary organizational backing. Furthermore, as a dark-horse, com-
promise candidate, he could not enjoy the full confidence of either
the Chamoun or the Chehab partisans. Helou’s immediate predeces-
sor bullied deputies into supporting reform legislation simply by
getting angry. When a notable complained that Chehab’s Civil

=== PDF_PAGE 347 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 327
FIGURE 6. A Fateful Choice
for the President.
Service Council was choking off patronage, the General bluntly
informed him that the President was not the notables’ electoral
agent. Such behavior was less easy for the more vulnerable Helou,
but even the strongest Lebanese President could be frustrated by
parochial legislators and administrators. Lebanon’s tendency toward
political stagnation, in the absence of a modern party structure, makes
it difficult for the President to innovate in policy formulation and
implementation. Despite some favorable developments among the
ruling establishment, the radical outsiders, the electoral process, and
the Presidency itself, the capacity of the system for rational policy
making and execution remains limited indeed.
Meager capabilities only multiply the effect of the loads imposed
on the system by its diverse and generally adverse environment.
The burdens arising out of Lebanon’s heterogeneous, primordial
political culture and its rapid social mobilization and the problems
imposed by international and regional political conflict were dis-
cussed in Part One. Their implications have been recognized by
President Helou, who has written:
It is no longer possible in the second half of the twentieth century
for any government to follow a policy of laisser-faire. . . . This
laisser-faire doctrine is now rejected because individuals do not always
know their best interest and even if they knew, they are not always
able to achieve it. . . . The Lebanese Government has the responsi-
bility of establishing the basic conditions and facilities which help the
Lebanese people to produce more and improve their living conditions.

=== PDF_PAGE 348 ===
328 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
Its main task is to establish the infrastructure of development and
provide the fundamental conditions needed by the enterprising Leb-
anese people.*°
As if in deference to Lebanon’s free enterprise norm, Helou adds,
“The Lebanese businessman is more enterprising and is a much
better manager than his government.” Social mobilization has set
the terms of the country’s major internal problems: the need for
rural development, expansion of urban facilities, low-cost public
housing, the establishment and efficient collection of more progres-
sive income taxes, and the development of new jobs in all sectors.
This set of tasks is a formidable one for an administrative apparatus
as small and weak as Lebanon’s. Parochial and transnational senti-
ments render these tasks even more difficult. Sectarianism and con-
flicting national loyalties divert time and resources from national
development and hamper administrative efficiency.
In light of these persistent problems, it was hardly surprising that
President Helou’s administrative reform quickly lost momentum and
his political stance became defensive rather than innovative. When
a prominent Beirut editor was assassinated in 1966—a casualty of
the Arab cold war—the Lebanese government could not prosecute
the case vigorously, for fear of damaging its relations with neighbor-
ing Arab states implicated in the affair. The liquidity crisis in the
country’s largest bank in the same year showed not only that Leba-
nese prosperity is paper thin but also that the regime lacked the
capacity to prevent it, even though its newly created Central Bank
had been established to ensure general financial stability. Israel’s
defeat of Syria, Jordan, and the U.A.R. in the war of June 1967
added new burdens to Lebanon’s economy, sectarian relations, and
foreign policy and challenged the power structure itself. The dangers
of political immobility seemed fully as serious as those inherent in
political modernization.
Lebanon’s democratic institutions—defective as they are—have
been the factor most responsible for the precarious viability of the
state during its first two decades of independence. Democratic pro-
cedures have turned the disintegrative aspects of this fragmented
political culture to functional uses. The flexibility of representative
institutions permits limited change within strictly defined limits. Gov-
ernments come and go, coalitions form and disintegrate, administra-
tive activity increases, regular free elections are held, and vast amounts
of political steam are dissipated. Nothing very startling happens in

=== PDF_PAGE 349 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 329
this process, which is precisely the reason for its success in promot-
ing stability. The trends surveyed here suggest, however, that prob-
lems that the system previously ignored, smothered, or “solved”
only in token fashion cannot be put off indefinitely. Lebanon’s po-
litical institutions work rather well when there is little to be done,
but as the work load increases the defects that once were tolerable
become dangerous liabilities. If this analysis is correct, the Lebanese
system can reduce its fundamental weaknesses by becoming more
democratic than it now is. The one innovation that would decisively
improve Lebanon’s prospects for future stability, development, and
social justice is the development of a country-wide, left-of-center
social-democratic party. A popular, progressive party would give
the representation processes added legitimacy and make the Presi-
dent stronger. It could recruit into legitimate and useful activity
the growing number of educated and mobilized people who are dis-
illusioned with the exclusive character of the present system. It
could also create new lines of loyalty and identity between the out-
lying areas and the regime.
The call for stronger parties in Lebanon is hardly new; in doctoral
dissertations, the press, and political debates the desirability of such
organizations is generally accepted, if only because parties are char-
acteristic of all politically advanced countries. Lebanese politicians
of varying tendencies have been trying (and generally failing) to
establish viable parties for years. Efforts to organize coherent na-
tional parties have been wrecked by local particularisms, especially
the sectarian loyalties. Existing parties, sincere as their protestations
to national loyalty may be, cannot shake off sectarian or personal
coloration and thus fail as integrating devices. As long as sectarian-
ism remains embedded in the mentality of the people, runs the fa-
miliar argument, a rationalized party or party system will be im-
possible. There are, however, several reasons for thinking that the
idea is more feasible than it once was. First, there is evidence to
suggest that an increasing proportion of the population, especially
in the educated middle class, can be mobilized into legitimate, open,
and routinized political activity, particularly if the appeal were
moderate and progressive. Second, the sectarian problem might be
managed not by merely avoiding it—the method employed by all
the past and present parties—but rather by explicit acceptance of
the fact that sectarianism is going to remain a potent force for the
foreseeable future. If Parliament and the bureaucracy can be inte-
grated through a precise allocation of positions according to a

=== PDF_PAGE 350 ===
330 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
formula, it is possible that a political party’s directorate can be or-
ganized the same way: 50 per cent Christian, 50 per cent non-
Christian. A party might even follow the example of guild socialism
and allow specific quotas for occupational groups as well. Instead of
being nonsectarian, the party would be avowedly multisectarian. In-
stead of destroying traditional channels, it would exploit them. Third,
a party of this sort might succeed if it could be organized from the
beginning in a nonparochial manner. In particular, its leaders would
have to devise means to permit the less affluent to run in parliamentary
elections without the support of rich landlords or bankers. Although
it would be fruitless to expect that popular regional leaders would
not attract membership because of parochial ties, it might be possible
to avoid the mistakes of the early 1950s, when recruitment of the
newly politicized middle class became bogged down in traditional
client politics. In short, an organizational effort far more elaborate
than any yet attempted in Lebanon would be necessary. If such a
social-democratic party actually took root, it is conceivable that it
would set in motion similar forces among the factional forces of a
more conservative tendency. Such a development would go a long
way toward institutionalizing the elements newly sensitized to poli-
tics and could greatly enhance the performance of the executive
agencies.
The Lebanese Republic is a remarkably adaptive political system
whose hope of survival lies in creative exploitation of its defects.
This study has attempted to show how, within limits, Lebanon parries
the forces of parochialism, transnationalism, and uneven social
change. Ingenious as the system is, however, it faces a future that is
dependent on the precarious balance of loads and capabilities. Leba-
non’s political capabilities have developed substantially over the first
two decades of independence: The system has become more liberal,
more open to citizen participation, more legitimate, and more capa-
ble of executive action. Its limited democratic structures have per-
formed surprisingly well as the adjustment mechanism for traditional
pluralism. The fact that Lebanon has survived at all under these
circumstances, with only one disastrous crisis in two decades, is
sufficient testimony to the fact that its political system has developed
an important measure of flexibility and complexity. The critical
question, however, remains: Are the loads on this system increasing
even faster than its capabilities? The evidence presented here, al-
though incomplete, suggests that they are. Lebanon’s historic prob-
lems are not disappearing: Parochialism if anything is aggravated by

=== PDF_PAGE 351 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize * 331
social change. The prospects for domestic prosperity and tranquillity
are dubious in the light of demographic trends and a weak produc-
tive sector. Radicalism, partially a function of continuing ferment
in the Arab world as a whole, finds no legitimate place in Lebanese
politics; and the system has failed to develop a responsible leftist
opposition. Despite the National Pact, Arab nationalism and regional
‘Tivalries continue to pose a certain threat to the Lebanese entity,
and Great Power competition continues to involve the people in
the area. Lebanon is too strategically situated to escape embroilment
in these conflicts. At the risk of underestimating Lebanese ingenuity,
it must be concluded that the Republic’s political future will be
stormy.

=== PDF_PAGE 352 ===
332 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
NOTES
1See Georges Naccache, Chéhabisme: Un Nouveau Style (Beirut: Cénacle
Libanaise, 1961). ;
2%n the Palestine war, Chehab commanded a minuscule Lebanese force in
operations that were mainly defensive in character. Actual Lebanese engage-
ment in Palestine itself was confined mainly to volunteers fighting under the
command of Fawzi al-Kaoukji. See Le Jour, May 19-26, 1948.
3 As the notables tend to look down on the army, so the officers also do not
hold politicians in very high esteem. Since the Palestine engagement, the younger
officers in Lebanon, as in every other Arab country that fought in that war,
have blamed the civilian politicians for the defeat. The acute sensitivity of
the Lebanese army to press comment—ostensibly on grounds of security—is
one indication of the latent bad feelings. ’
4 The biographical data are from the Bureau des Documentations Libanaises
et Arabes, Beirut.
5 Chehab’s concern for modernizing the army is indicated by this extract
from an article he wrote for the army’s magazine, al-Jundi al-lubnanit [The
Lebanese Soldier] in August 1946 (p. 3): “It has not been the custom that the
head of the Army talks to followers in newspapers and magazines. But The
Lebanese Soldier is not a stranger in our midst. It is from us and to us. That is
why I saw that through it I should direct to the officers and men encourage-
ment for taking it as a stage for increasing their education and to slake their
thirst for knowledge and to shorten the distances between them and the out-
side world. . . . Educating the Lebanese soldier in the research, technical,
methodological, historical, and scientific . . . subjects . . . helps the growth
of general education in explaining the things that are connected with military
affairs.”
6 The Commander in Chief is appointed by cabinet decree; has complete
control over all military forces, including the Deuxiéme Bureau; and is nomi-
nally responsible to the Minister of Defense. Parliament has no powers of
supervision or investigation of the military, and the President is not given ex-
plicit superior military command. There is implicitly such a grant of command,
perhaps, in the Presidential obligation to defend national sovereignty.
7 See Chapter 3 of this book and Fahim I. Qubain, Crisis in Lebanon (Wash-
ington, D.C.: Middle East Institute, 1961), pp. 154-6. The seven votes went
to Raymond Edde. There was one abstention. Ten pro-Chamoun deputies did
not attend the session.
8 Philippe Taqla was an old Destourian; Ali Bazzi was a former member
of the National Appeal and a moderate Arab nationalist; Maurice Zouein was
an independent and a respected Maronite notable who leaned in the direction
of Raymond Edde; Fuad Butros was a Beirut lawyer close to the Kataeb; and
Fuad Najjar was a Druze agricultural expert whose views were closer to those
of Jumblat than to those of Arslan.
9 L’Orient, July 21, 1960.
10 For the vote, see L’Orient, May 21, 1961.
1 T’Orient, October 19 and 21, 1961.

=== PDF_PAGE 353 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 333
'2 During the Khoury regime, an analogous position had, for a time, been
filled by the President’s brother. General Chehab kept his immediate family out
of politics.
13 This group included Lieutenant Colonel Yussef Shmayet (Druze), Chief
of Staff, Major Toufic Jalbout (Greek Orthodox), Director of General Se-
curity; Lieutenant Colonel Antoine Saad (Maronite), Chief of Army Intelli-
gence; Major Frangois Genadry, assistant to Lieutenant Colonel Shmayet; and
nt ie Ahmad al-Hajj and Munir Sardouk (both Sunnite), the President’s
aides.
_ ** Given the Lebanese context, Chehab could hardly be expected to adver-
tise any admiration he might have felt for Nasser’s domestic policy. Although
Chehab’s programs for “social justice” were far milder than Nasser’s “Arab
socialism,” he shared with the Egyptian a desire to use the state for developing
the society.
1 The primary instruments of the alleged interference were the Deuxigme
Bureau of the army, responsible for military intelligence, and the branches of
the Ministry of Interior that were responsible for general security and internal
security, which embraced the police, gendarmerie, and district general-security
departments. For a description of these agencies, see George Grassmuck and
Kamal Salibi, Reformed Administration in Lebanon (Beirut: Catholic Press,
1964), pp. 48-51.
16 This development was a continuation of the bitter feud that resulted in
the slaying of Muhammad Abboud, one of President Khoury’s old associates,
in 1953. See also Chapter 7 of this book. Abboud’s father engaged Osman
to carry on the struggle, and in 1964 Osman apparently found the military
willing to help him.
17 Charles Rizk, “Le Régime Politique Libanais” (Unpublished doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Paris, 1964), p. 156.
18 Grassmuck and Salibi, A Manual of Lebanese Administration (Beirut:
American University, 1955), p. 8.
19 Sleiman Gemayel, Evolution du Budget Libanais (Paris: Librairie Ge-
nerale de Droit et de Jurisprudence, 1962), pp. 44, 48. The latter figure includes
the internal security forces of the Ministry of Interior. It is useful to recall,
however, that size is relative; the total Lebanese civil-service manpower in 1958
was a bit less than half that of the New York City Transit Authority.
20 Ralph Crow and Adnan Iskandar, “Administrative Reform in Lebanon,
1958-1959,” International Review of Administrative Sciences, 27, No. 3
(1961), 293-307.
21 Grassmuck and Salibi, A Manual of Lebanese Administration, p. 17.
22 Camille Chamoun, Crise au Moyen-Orient (Paris: Gallimard, 1963), p.
407. The army was large enough, he suggests, to have crushed the insurgents,
if its commander had wished to do so.
23 “Animated by this new spirit, that of organizing social cooperation on
modern foundations, the state is forced to resolve social problems in a way
that allows it to reinforce among the Lebanese the belief, already rooted in
them, that a country seeking to modernize and to develop its economic and
social life can do so by democratic means.” President Chehab’s Independence
Day Address, 1962; quoted in L’Orient, November 22, 1962.

=== PDF_PAGE 354 ===
334 * INSTITUTIONAL PERFORMANCE
24 Jean Chami, “Le Ministére du Plan Fait Peau Neuve,” L’Orient, May 31,
1962. See also Grassmuck and Salibi, Reformed Administration in Lebanon,
pp. 78-80. oe ?
25 Republic of Lebanon Ministry of Planning, Besoins et Possibilités de Dé-
veloppement du Liban (Beirut: 1960-1961).
26 Jean Chami, “L’IRFED Assura, Pendant 2 Ans, la Direction des Etudes
et de le Planification,” L’Orient, June 1, 1962. For a critical evaluation of the
IRFED mission’s recommendations, see Georges G. Corm, Politique Eco-
nomique et Planification au Liban, 1953-1963 (Beirut: Universelle, 1964),
pp. 126-7. .
27 Raja Himadeh, The Fiscal System of Lebanon (Beirut: Khayat’s, 1961),
pp. 97-8.
28 Republic of Lebanon Decree No. 6844 (1961).
29Corm, “Bilan des Finances Publiques Libanaises: 1945-1965,” Le Com-
merce du Levant, March 3, 1965, p. 11.
30 “Tt is impossible to say who is responsible for inspecting the food served
in a large mountain hotel: the local municipality? the Commissariat of Tourism?
the Fraud Control Service? or the Ministry of Health? When a new street is
opened in the capital, hardly has the asphalt been laid before the Water, Sewer,
Electricity and Telephone Services come, each in its turn, to tear it up, in order
to install their cables or their pipes. . . .” L’Orient, October 22, 1958.
31 Lebanese Republic, Les Décrets Législatifs de la Réforme (Bureau des
Documentations Libanaises et Arabes, 1959) (mimeo).
32 Crow and Iskandar, op. cit., pp. 301-4.
33“. . [N]ever have public services been more disorganized and bureauc-
racy more sluggish than since the problem of the famous decree laws of 1959;
never have public officials taken less initiative.” L’Orient, May 16, 1960.
34 Crow and Iskandar, op. cit., pp. 304-7.
35 Himadeh, op. cit., p. 112.
36 Grassmuck and Salibi, Reformed Administration in Lebanon, pp. 22-3.
37 Interview with Khatchik Babikian, June 27, 1964.
38 Adnan Iskandar, Bureaucracy in Lebanon, Social Science Series, No. 22
(Beirut: American University of Beirut Publications of the Faculty of Arts
and Sciences, 1964), pp. 128-34. See also Shaykh Farid Dahdah, Report
of the President of the Civil Service Council (Beirut: 1963).
39 Rizk, op. cit., p. 167.
40 See also Crow, “Religious Sectarianism in the Lebanese Political System,”
Journal of Politics, 24 (August 1962), 489-520; Halim Fayyad, “Sectarianism
and the Lebanese Administration” (Unpublished master’s thesis, American Uni-
versity of Beirut, 1956). Fayyad reports (p. 69) the sectarian affiliations of
eighteen Directors and Inspectors-General in 1942. Thirteen of the eighteen,
or 72 per cent, were Christian.
41 Comparisons from Bruce Russett et al., World Handbook of Political and
Social Indicators (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1964), p. 65. Of the
forty-one countries for which data were available, Lebanon would rank be-
tween the thirteenth and fourteenth and in the fourth case decile and fourth
range decile. Figures for Lebanon are from Ministry of Finance, Résumé, pp.
Telhe

=== PDF_PAGE 355 ===
Presidential Power: The Attempt to Modernize + 335
42 Ministry of Finance, Résumé, pp. 90, 153; Himadeh, op. cit., p. 21.
*8 Georges Corm, “Bilan des Finances Publiques Libanaises,” pp. 10-3.
4 Among the larger projects are the construction of the coastal superhighway
that links Saida, Beirut, and Tripoli; the improvement of the mountain ap-
proach roads to Beirut; and the enlargement of the ports of Beirut and
Tripoli.
a For comparative budget figures, see Ministry of Finance, Résumé, pp. 90,
46 T’Orient, May 30, 1962; Le Jour, June 18, 1965.
47 The texts of decrees and a description of the operations are found in its
publication, Plan Vert (Beirut: 1965). For an evaluation, see Henry Yacoub,
“Plan Vert a un An,” L’Orient, August 3 and 4, 1965.
48 Yahya Ahmed Mahmassani, A Central Bank for Lebanon (Beirut: Feghali,
1961), pp. 28-9.
49“Le Premier Rapport Annuel de la Banque du Liban,” Le Commerce du
Levant, August 11, 1965, p. 1.
50 Article 54 states, “Until such time that legislation is enacted for social
security, the employer shall pay to the worker . . . a dismissal indemnity
equivalent to the wage for one month for each year of service and one-half
month if the period of service is less than one year.” (English translation
courtesy of the American Embassy, Beirut.)
51 T’Orient, November 19, 1958.
52 Social Security Code, Decree No. 13,955 of September 26, 1963, published
in The Official Gazette of September 30, 1963. For further descriptions, see
L’Orient, November 25 and 26, 1958, and February 17, March 15, and May
10, 1965; and Iskandar, Social Security for Lebanon (Beirut: Dar al-tali‘ah,
1962), pp. 57-63.
53 Iskandar, pp. 56-76. Also see Elias Saba, “Social Security in Lebanon:
A Blessing or a Curse?” Middle East Forum, 37, No. 4 (1961), 27-31.
54 See, for example, le Pére le Génissel, “La Sécurité Sociale au Liban:
Est-Elle Souhaitable? Est-Elle Possible?” La Revue Sociale, No. 2 (February
1961), pp. 5-11. “La sécurité sociale produit une certaine rédistribution de la
richesse et, partout ou elle est acceptée de bon coeur, développe un sentiment
de solidarité sociale qui influe beaucoup sur la cohésion de la communauté
nationale.” (p. 5)
[Social security produces a certain redistribution of the wealth and, wherever
it is accepted in good part, develops a sense of social solidarity that has a strong
influence on the cohesion of the national community.”]
55 Charles Helou, “Lebanon’s Development Policy,” Middle East Forum, 41,
No. 2 (1965), 5-6.

=== PDF_PAGE 356 ===
